 page 1 
  planning report GLA/4407/02 
 10 February 2020 
49-53 Glengall Road 
in the London Borough of Southwark  
planning application no. 17/AP/4612  
  
Strategic planning application stage II referral  
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 
and 2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Demolition of existing buildings and erection of a part 6, 8 and 15-storey building to provide 
3,716 sq.m. of flexible workspace (B1c, and B2/B8), 181 residential dwellings, with 
associated access and highway works, amenity areas, cycle, disabled and commercial car 
parking and refuse/recycling stores. 
The applicant 
The applicant is Twenty Twenty Glengall Limited and the architect is HKR Architects.  
Key dates 
• Pre-application meeting: 10 October 2017 
• Stage 1 report: 19 March 2018 
• Committee meeting: 15 January 2019 
 
Strategic issues summary 
Principle of development: Given the co-ordinated approach to the managed release of 
industrial land and the type of industrial floorspace proposed, the principle of 
development is now acceptable in strategic planning terms (paragraphs 8-12). 
Affordable housing: 35% by habitable room (without subsidy), with a tenure split of 72% 
social rent and 28% intermediate as London Living Rent and/or shared ownership. Early 
and late stage reviews have been secured via legal obligation as required, as the scheme 
does not qualify for the Fast Track Route (paragraphs 13-15). 
Urban design, climate change and transport: The issues raised at Stage 1 have been 
satisfactorily addressed either by way of additional information and/or secured through 
conditions or legal obligations (paragraphs 16-21). 
The Council’s decision 
In this instance, Southwark Council has resolved to grant permission subject to conditions 
and a S106 legal agreement. 
Recommendation 
That Southwark Council be advised that the Mayor is content for it to determine the case 
itself, subject to any action that the Secretary of State may take and does not therefore 
wish to direct refusal or direct that he is to be the local planning authority. 
 
 page 2 
Context 
1 On 14 March 2018, the Mayor of London received documents from Southwark 
Council notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance to 
develop the above site for the above uses. This was referred under Categories 1A, 1B, 
1C and 3E of the Schedule to the 2008 Order: 
• 1(A) ‘Development which comprises or includes provision of more than 150 
houses, flats or houses and flats’ 
• 1B(c) ‘Development (other than development which only comprises the 
provision of houses, flats or houses and flats) which comprises or includes the 
erection of a building or buildings outside Central London and with a total 
floorspace of 15,000 square metres’ 
• 1C(c) ‘Development which comprises or includes the erection of a building of 
more than 30 metres high and is outside of the City of London’ 
• 3E ‘Development which does not accord with one or more provisions of the 
development plan in force in the area in which the application site is situated; 
comprising more than 2,500 square metres of floorspace for a specific Use 
Class.   
 
2 On 16 April 2018, the Mayor considered planning report GLA/4379/01, and 
subsequently advised Southwark Council that the application did not comply with the 
London Plan and draft London Plan, for the reasons set out in paragraph 51 of the 
above-mentioned report.  
3 A copy of the above-mentioned report is attached. The essentials of the case 
regarding the proposal, the site, case history, strategic planning issues and relevant 
policies and guidance are as set out therein, unless otherwise stated in this report. On 4 
December 2018, Southwark Council resolved to grant permission subject to conditions 
and a S106 legal agreement, and on 28 January 2020 it advised the Mayor of this 
decision. Under the provisions of Article 5 of the Town & Country Planning (Mayor of 
London) Order 2008 the Mayor may allow the draft decision to proceed unchanged, 
direct Southwark Council under Article 6 to refuse the application or issue a direction to 
Southwark Council under Article 7 that he is to act as the Local Planning Authority for 
the purposes of determining the application. The Mayor has until 10 February 2020 to 
notify Southwark Council of his decision and to issue any direction.   
4 The decision on this case, and the reasons will be made available on the GLA’s 
website www.london.gov.uk. 
Consultation stage issues summary  
5 At the consultation stage, Southwark Council was advised that the application did 
not fully comply with the London Plan and draft London Plan, for the reasons given 
below: 
• Principle of development: the inclusion of residential units on this protected 
industrial site in the Old Kent Road Opportunity Area is not currently 
supported, in line with London Plan Policies 2.17 and 4.4 and draft London 
 page 3 
Plan Policy E6. The balance of uses proposed does not accord with London 
Plan Policy 4.4 and Policy E7 of the draft London Plan and should the site be 
considered suitable for mixed-use development; the applicant must increase 
industrial floorspace to address the requirements of draft London Plan Policy 
E7 and the draft Old Kent Road Area Action Plan.   
• Affordable housing: 35% by habitable room with a 68:32 split in favour of 
affordable rent. This does not meet the 50% threshold for industrial land under 
the Fast Track Route set out in the draft London Plan Policy H6. GLA officers will 
robustly interrogate the applicant’s viability assessment to ensure the maximum 
level of affordable housing in delivered. The applicant must investigate the use of 
grant funding to increase provision further. Early implementation and late stage 
review mechanisms must be secured. Should the applicant deliver 50% 
affordable housing the late stage review mechanism will be negated. 
• Design: Daylight/sunlight issues on residential units to be addressed and agent 
of change principles demonstrated. Further discussion required on massing and 
layout in relation to the linear park and the retained chimney. 
• Climate change: The applicant must provide the carbon emission figure in 
tonnes per annum for each stage of the energy hierarchy for domestic and 
non-domestic elements separately as well as for the site-wide development as 
well as evidence of how London Plan Policy 5.9 and draft London Plan Policy 
SI4 has been assessed demonstrating how the risk of overheating and cooling 
demand will be minimised for each building type. 
• Transport: There are major concerns about the capacity of the local public 
transport network to accommodate the additional travel generated by 
developments in the Old Kent Road Opportunity Area such as this in advance 
of the Bakerloo Line Extension and any significant pre-BLE planning 
permissions must secure appropriate contributions towards improvements to 
bus services and secure active travel measures.  Further information is 
required on pedestrian and cycle assessments, cycle and blue badge parking, 
servicing and travel plan.  Conditions and Section 106 obligations are required 
to secure the following; public transport contribution; healthy streets 
contribution; exclusion of future occupiers from obtaining parking permits within 
the local CPZ; travel plan; delivery and servicing plan; and construction and 
logistics plan. 
Strategic planning policy and guidance update 
6 The following draft policy and guidance are now material considerations:  
• the National Planning Policy Framework and National Planning Practice 
Guidance (2019); 
• the London Plan – Intend to publish version (December 2019), which should be 
considered on the basis explained in the NPPF;  
• New Southwark Plan Proposed Submission Version: Amended Policies 2019, 
which should be considered on the basis explained in the NPPF; and 
• letter from the leader of Southwark Council to Jules Pipe, Deputy Mayor for 
Planning, Skills and Regeneration dated 02/09/18. 
 page 4 
Update 
7 Since the Stage 1, GLA and TfL officers have engaged in discussion with the 
applicant and the Council to address the outstanding issues, including the release of 
industrial land within the Old Kent Road Opportunity Area. The scheme has also been 
amended to optimise the use of the site in relation to design and materials of the 
buildings' elevations; improve internal layouts; introduce a revised internal commercial 
corridor to provide visual link to Latona Yard; and, Latona Yard improvements. In 
addition, various planning conditions and legal obligations are secured as part of 
Southwark Council’s draft decision and draft s106 agreement. Having regard to this, an 
assessment against the strategic issues raised at the consultation stage is set out 
below.  
Principle of development 
8 Given the designation of the site as Strategic Industrial Land, the inclusion of 
residential use was not supported at the Stage I consultation. Additionally, if 
redevelopment of the site to provide a mix of uses was considered acceptable, the re-
provision of genuine industrial floorspace in line with Policy E7 of the Mayor’s intend to 
publish London Plan was required. 
9 The BLE programme and the location of its potential tube stations is subject to 
ongoing discussions between Southwark Council and TfL, as is the quantum of 
development the area could sustainably support in advance of the BLE, what additional 
transport measures would be needed in the interim, and how new development can 
fairly contribute towards these costs. GLA officers accept that the application site is 
within an area identified as suitable to come forward for high density redevelopment in 
advance of the BLE. 
10 Regarding the introduction of residential uses on SIL, London Plan Policy 2.17 
requires boroughs to promote, manage and where appropriate protect strategic 
industrial land, and London Plan Policy 4.4 commits the Mayor to work with boroughs to 
adopt a rigorous approach to industrial land management, to ensure a sufficient stock of 
industrial land and premises is retained, and to plan, monitor and manage the release of 
surplus industrial land where it can contribute to strategic and local planning objectives, 
especially the provision of new housing. Policy E5 of the Mayor’s intend to publish 
London Plan confirms that non SIL uses within SIL should be refused unless there has 
been a strategically co-ordinated process of SIL consolidation carried out through a 
planning framework or Development Plan document review process (and adopted as 
policy in a Development Plan), or as part of a co-ordinated master planning process in 
collaboration with the GLA.  
11 GLA and TfL officers have worked closely with Southwark Council officers to 
reach agreement on the broad geography and phasing of strategic industrial land 
release - which includes this site - and consolidation development in the area covered 
by the Old Kent Road Action Area Plan (OKR AAP). Southwark Council has also 
committed to a retention and relocation strategy for existing industrial businesses within 
the OKR Opportunity Area and has confirmed both its commitment to intensifying 
industrial uses on existing and new SIL sites, and to purchasing additional land to 
deliver these objectives. Considering these processes and commitments, GLA officers 
accept that the application site is suitable in principle for transfer from SIL to LSIS – as 
proposed within the draft Southwark Local Plan and the draft AAP. 