1 
 
planning report GLA/2931a/02 
   24 February 2020 
St James’ Market Phase 2 
in Westminster City Council 
planning application no. 19/04480/FULL 
Strategic planning application stage II referral 
Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 
2007; Town and Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Redevelopment (with partial façade retention) to provide eight storeys plus basement building 
for 27,000 sq m of retail/office floorspace together with a cinema. 
The applicant 
The applicant is St James’s Market Development (No. 2) Ltd , the architect is Make. 
Key dates 
Stage I report:  5 August 2019 
Committee meeting:  17 December 2019. 
Strategic issues 
Principle of development: The scheme would enhance the retail and office floorspace offer 
and quality of this part of the Central Activities Zone and is therefore supported. 
Urban and inclusive design:  The approach to design is strongly supported and the form and 
proportions of new interventions respond successfully to the special heritage value of the wider 
conservation area. Conditions have been secured in relation to high quality detailing, inclusive 
accessibility and a fire exit strategy for the retained cinema. 
Heritage:  The proposed development will result in less than substantial harm on the Grade II 
listed Carlton Cinema and the conservation areas. The public benefits (including economic, 
leisure and public realm benefits) arising from the scheme outweigh the less than substantial 
harm. 
Transport: Information has been provided in relation to Healthy Streets/Vision Zero analysis; 
cycle infrastructure; cycle hire docking station; London Underground infrastructure and TfL bus 
asset protection.   A contribution towards relocating/ expanding existing cycle hire docking 
station has been secured by secured 106 obligation. 
Issues relating to energy, sustainable drainage and water efficiency are resolved and 
relevant conditions and Section 106 obligations secured.  
The Council’s decision 
In this instance, Westminster City Council has resolved to grant permission, subject to 
conditions and a section 106 agreement. 
Recommendation 
 
2 
 
That Westminster City Council be advised that the Mayor is content for it to determine the case 
itself, subject to any action that the Secretary of State may take and does not therefore wish to 
direct that he is to be the local planning authority.  
Context 
1 On 27 June 2019, the Mayor of London received documents from Westminster 
City Council notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance to 
develop the above site for the above uses.  This was referred to the Mayor under 
Categories 1B and 1C of the Schedule to the Order 2008:  
• Category 1B: “ Development (other than development which only comprises the 
provision of houses, flats, or houses and flats) which comprises or includes the 
erection of a building or buildings – in Central London (other than the City of 
London) and with a total floorspace of more than 20,000 square metres”.  
 
• Category 1C: “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a 
building of (c) more than 30 metres high and is outside the City of London.”  
 
2 On 5 August 2019, the Deputy Mayor for Planning, Regeneration and Skills, 
acting under delegated authority, considered planning report GLA/2931a/01, and 
subsequently advised Westminster City Council that the application did not yet comply 
with the London Plan and the draft London Plan; however, the possible remedies set 
out in paragraph 57 of the above-mentioned report could address these deficiencies. 
3 A copy of the above-mentioned report is attached.  The essentials of the case 
with regard to the proposal, the site, case history, strategic planning issues and relevant 
policies and guidance are as set out therein, unless otherwise stated in this report.  
Since then, further information has been provided in response to the Deputy Mayor’s 
concerns (see below).  On 17 December 2019, Westminster Council decided that it was 
minded to grant permission, subject to conditions and agreement of a section 106 
agreement.  Under the provisions of Article 5 of the Town and Country Planning (Mayor 
of London) Order 2008, the Mayor may allow the draft decision to proceed unchanged 
or issue a direction under Article 7 that he is to act as the local planning authority for the 
purpose of determining the application. The Mayor has until 24 February 2020.  
 Consultation stage issues summary 
4 At consultation stage, Westminster City Council was advised that the application 
did not yet comply with the London Plan and the draft London Plan as set out below;  
• Principle of development: The scheme would enhance the retail and office 
floorspace offer and quality of this part of the Central Activities Zone and is 
therefore supported. 
• Design: The design responds successfully to the surrounding built context in 
terms of acknowledging the existing built character of heritage assets and in 
creating new pedestrian routes and spaces across the site. No strategic design 
concerns are raised. 
3 
 
• Heritage: The proposed development will result in less than substantial harm 
on the Grade II listed Carlton Cinema and the conservation areas. The public 
benefits, including economic, leisure and public realm benefits, arising from the 
scheme outweigh the less than substantial harm, and therefore the scheme 
accords with heritage policies. 
• Energy: Comprehensive comments have been provided to Westminster 
Council. In summary, while the proposal is generally supported, further 
information is required in relation to overheating, district heating, heat pumps 
and photo voltaic panels. 
• Sustainable drainage: Additional information is required regarding 
sustainable drainage including attenuation volume calculations, exceedance 
assessment information, and a London Proforma should be provided. 
• Water Efficiency and urban greening: Further consideration should be given 
to water harvesting and reuse to reduce consumption of water across the 
development. Urban greening should be embedded as a fundamental element 
of site and building design. The proposed development’s Urban Greening 
Factor should be calculated, and opportunities to create green links to the local 
green network should be explored. 
• Transport: The Applicant is be required to satisfactorily address issues such 
as Healthy Streets/Vision Zero analysis; cycle infrastructure; cycle hire docking 
station; London Underground infrastructure and TfL bus asset protection. A 
contribution towards relocating/ expanding existing cycle hire docking station 
should also be secured. 
 
5 The Mayor’s decision on this case, and the reasons, will be made available on 
the GLA’s website www.london.gov.uk. 
Update 
6 Since consultation stage, GLA officers have engaged in discussions with the 
applicant, the Council and TfL officers with a view to addressing the above matters.  
Furthermore, as part of Westminster City Council’s draft decision on the case, various 
planning conditions and obligations have been proposed to address the above concerns 
and ensure that the development is acceptable in planning terms.  
Principle of development 
7 As set out at consultation stage, the scheme would provide an enhanced retail 
and office floorspace offer of this part of the Central Activities Zone (CAZ) and is 
therefore supported. This part of the West End/CAZ is synonymous with cinema and 
theatre uses and in accordance with London Plan Policies 2.11(E) and 4.6 and 
Policies SD4(E) and HC5 of the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan, the existing 
cinema use on the site is afforded a level of protection. The proposal is re-providing a 
cinema on the site which is strongly supported.  
 
Urban and inclusive design 
8 As stated at consultation stage, the approach to design is strongly supported. 
The architectural response to the site; including new-build, façade retention and 
refurbishment indicates a high-quality scheme can be delivered, and the form and 
4 
 
proportions of new interventions respond successfully to the special heritage value of 
the wider conservation area. 
 
9 The site is within Primrose Hill to Westminster protected view (LVMF 4A.2). As 
stated at consultation stage, based on the visual assessment provided, GLA Officers 
are of the view that the applicant has demonstrated that the proposal would not 
impact upon the protected strategic view of LVMF 4A.2 Primrose Hill to Westminster. 
As requested at consultation stage, conditions have been recommended securing the 
exemplary detailing and the use of high-quality materials for the whole development, 
including the Carlton Theatre façade and mansard roof structures.  
 
10 As requested at Stage 1, the inclusive access commitments set out the 
application documents have been secured through conditions, including the detailing 
of level changes within the public realm. A condition has also been recommended 
detailing that a fire exit strategy for the retained cinema is imposed. This is supported 
by GLA Officers.  
 
Heritage 
 
11 The Carlton Cinema which comprises part of the application site is Grade II 
listed, and the site also sits within Haymarket Conservation Area, and extends into 
the Regent Street Conservation Area. The site is adjacent to the St James’s 
Conservation Area.  
 
12 As set out at Stage 1, the proposals enhance the Grade II listed Carlton 
Cinemas role as a central focal point of the Haymarket elevation however the oversail 
of the roof of the listed cinema will result in some harm; however, because of the 
setback nature of the oversail, and because of other improvements to the façade 
proposed within the scheme, this harm is considered to be less than substantial 
harm. It was also considered that the impact on the Haymarket and Regent Street 
Conservations Areas resulting from the proposals would amount to less than 
substantial harm.  
 
13 As stated at Stage 1, the proposal will deliver a range of economic, social, 
leisure, cultural, entertainment and employment public benefits through the 
revitalisation of Charles II Street buildings, the provision of high-quality office space 
and ground floor retail uses, as well as public realm improvements. Additionally, the 
enhancement of the Carlton Cinema façade will contribute to the protection and 
enhancement of the listed building, and the Haymarket Conservation Area. 
 
14 Accordingly, having regard to the statutory duties in respect of listed buildings 
and conservation areas in the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) 
Act 1990, the relevant paragraphs in the NPPF in relation to heritage assets and 
having given the finding of harm considerable importance and weight, GLA officers 
are satisfied that, for the reasons set out above, the proposal is, on balance, 
acceptable. Noting that the enhancement of the Carlton Cinema façade will contribute 
to the protection and enhancement of the listed building, and the conservation area, 
and the successful design response of the proposals to the heritage designations of 
the site, the scheme is also considered to accord with London Plan Policy 7.8. and 
Policy HC1 of the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan. 
 