 
                        t  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dear Jonathan 
 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority 
Acts 1999 and 2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 
2008. 
Eastman Dental Hospital Site and Buildings (including the Former Royal 
Free Hospital the Eastman Dental Clinic and the Levy Wing), 256 Gray's Inn 
Road WC1X 8LD and Frances Gardner House Wren Street WC1X 0HD 
Local planning authority reference: 2019/2879/P 
 
I refer to the copy of the above planning application, which was received on the 1st of July 2019.  
On 5 August 2019, Jules Pipe, Deputy Mayor for Planning, Regeneration and Skills, acting under 
delegated authority, considered a report on this proposal, reference GLA/4979a/01.  A copy of the 
report is attached, in full.  This letter comprises the statement that the Mayor is required to provide 
under Article 4(2) of the Order. 
The Deputy Mayor considers that the application does not comply with the London Plan and draft 
London Plan, for the reasons set out in paragraph 66 of the above report. However, the resolution 
of those issues could lead to the application becoming compliant with the London Plan and draft 
London Plan. 
 
If your Council subsequently resolves to make a draft decision on the application, it must consult 
the Mayor again under Article 5 of the Order and allow him fourteen days to decide whether to 
allow the draft decision to proceed unchanged, or direct the Council under Article 6 to refuse the 
application, or issue a direction under Article 7 that he is to act as the local planning authority for 
the purpose of determining the application and any connected application. You should therefore 
send me a copy of any representations made in respect of the application, and a copy of any 
officer’s report, together with a statement of the decision your authority proposes to make, and (if 
it proposed to grant permission) a statement of any conditions the authority proposes to impose 
and a draft of any planning obligation it proposes to enter into and details of any proposed 
planning contribution. 
 
Jonathan McClue 
Regeneration and Planning Development Management  
London Borough of Camden 
Town Hall 
Judd Hall  
London 
WC1H 9JE 
Our ref:  GLA/4979a/01/EL 
Your ref: 2019/2879/P 
Date: 5 August 2019 
 
 
 
- 2 - 
 
 
Please note that the Transport for London case officer for this application is Amy Tempest,  e-mail 
AmyTempest@tfl.gov.uk. 
Yours sincerely 
 
 
Allison Flight 
Deputy Head of Development Management 
 
 
cc Andrew Dismore, London Assembly Constituency Member 
 Nicky Gavron, Chair of London Assembly Planning Committee 
 National Planning Casework Unit, DCLG 
Lucinda Turner, TfL 
 
 