 
  planning report GLA/5094/01  
   3 February 2020 
Bow Common Gas Works  
in the London Borough of Tower Hamlets  
planning application no. PA/19/02379 
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 2007; Town 
& Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 
The proposal 
Hybrid application – (detail) redevelopment by erection of three buildings up to 13 storeys in height to 
provide up to 253 homes and ancillary facilities and (outline- all matters reserved) for redevelopment by 
erection of buildings up to 19 storeys in height to provide up to 1033 homes, up to 3104 sq m 
retail/workspace/community/cultural uses, together with a new sixth form centre and open space/play 
space (35% AH overall)  
The applicant 
The applicants are St. William, and the architects is Studio Egret West 
Strategic issues 
Principle of development:  The principle of a residential-led redevelopment of the redundant gas 
works within an emerging opportunity area is strongly supported. 
Affordable housing: 35% affordable housing (by habitable room) split 70:30 in favour of low-cost rent. 
39% affordable housing and 100% low cost rent in phase 1 (detailed element)). The applicant has 
supplied evidence seeking to establish that extraordinary costs would be incurred in order to bring the 
gas works forward for development.  The proposal could follow the Fast Track route, subject to the 
GLA’s review of evidence demonstrating extraordinary costs, in line with footnote 59 to paragraph 
4.5.7of the Intend to Publish London Plan. 
Urban design: The layout principles, heights and massing arrangement across the masterplan are 
broadly supported. It is considered that the less than substantial harm caused through the loss of the 
Bow Cottage (a non-designated heritage asset), is outweighed by the public benefits of the proposal. 
Sustainable development: The applicant should provide further detail on the proposed ASHP and 
Renewable energy provision. The shortfall in CO2 reductions should be met through an offset 
contribution  
Transport: Due to the impact that the proposed development will have on public transport a financial 
contribution towards mitigation measures is required.  The scope of off-site highway works needs to be 
agreed. Car-free development should be secured through condition.  
Recommendation 
That Tower Hamlets Council be advised that while the scheme is generally supported in strategic 
planning terms, the application does not fully comply with the London Plan, for the reasons set out in 
paragraph 108 of this report.  
 
 
Context 
1 On 20 November 2019 the Mayor of London received documents from Tower 
Hamlets Council notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance 
to develop the above site for the above uses. Under the provisions of The Town & 
Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 the Mayor must provide the Council 
with a statement setting out whether he considers that the application complies with the 
London Plan, and his reasons for taking that view. The Mayor may also provide other 
comments.  This report sets out information for the Mayor’s use in deciding what 
decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under the following Categories of the Schedule to the 
Order 2008: 
• 1A.1 “Development which comprises or includes the provision of more than 150 
houses, flats, or houses and flats.”  
• 1B.1(c) “Development (other than development which only comprises the 
provision of houses, flats, or houses and flats) which comprises or includes the 
erection of a building or buildings outside Central London and with a total 
floorspace of more than 15,000 square metres” 
• 1C.1(c) “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a building 
more than 30 metres high and is outside the City of London.”  
 
3 Once Tower Hamlets Council has resolved to determine the application, it is 
required to refer it back to the Mayor for his decision as to whether to direct refusal; take 
it over for his own determination; or allow the Council to determine it itself. 
4  The environmental information for the purposes of the Town and Country 
Planning (Environmental Impact Assessment) Regulations 2017 has been taken into 
account in the consideration of this case. 
5 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA 
website www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
6 The site currently comprises the Bow Common Gas Works which contains two 
decommissioned gasholders, an operational pressure reduction system (PRS), the 
former office and laboratory and the locally listed Bow Cottage. To the north and east of 
the site is the Poplar Harca Lincoln Estate which predominantly comprises medium 
density residential development. To the west is the railway viaduct beyond which is 
Tower Hamlets Cemetery park. To the south is Bow Common Lane, St Paul’s Way 
Trust School and the recently redeveloped Poplar Harca Leopold Estate. Access to the 
site is via Bow Common Lane to the south or Knapp Road to the north. 
 
7 The site is within the emerging Poplar Riverside Opportunity Area and the 
Poplar Riverside Housing Zone. The western edge of the site is within the 
safeguarding zone for Crossrail 2. The site is allocated in the Tower Hamlets Local 
Plan (Site 2.1), for mixed use development including housing, a primary school and 
public open space. 
 
 
8 The site is located on Bow Common Lane. The nearest section of Transport for 
London Road Network (TLRN) is Burdett Road, located approximately 540m to the 
south-west (from the centre of the site). Adjoining the site on Bow Common Lane is a 
pair of bus stops that are served by the 323. Due to the size of the site, bus services 
within walking distance (640m) varies, with some areas being in walking distance of 5 
services whilst other areas are only in walking distance for 2 services. The nearest 
London Underground station to the site is Mile End Road, just over 1km to the north 
of the site. The nearest DLR station is Devons Road. 
 
9 Due to the aforementioned public transport connections, the majority of the site 
has a Public Transport Access Level (PTAL) of 2. There is a small section of the site 
adjacent to Bow Common Lane which has a PTAL of 6a and PTAL 3.  
 
10 Cycleway 2 extends along Mile End Road, located just over 1km to the north of 
the site. This route provides a strategic cycle route between Aldgate and Stratford. 
 
Details of the proposal 
11 The proposal is in the form of a hybrid planning application, comprised of full 
and outline elements. Outline planning permission, with all matters reserved, is 
sought for the demolition of existing buildings and construction of a residential-led 
mixed-use development in buildings of up to 19 storeys, comprising up to 
131,656sq.m. of residential floorspace (up to 1,033 homes), up to 3,104 sq.m. of non-
residential space comprising retail (classes A1-4) workspace, community, and cultural 
uses and residents facilities and up to 4,060 sqm to provide a new sixth form centre 
and over 14,945 sq.m of publicly accessible open space and play space.  
 
12 A full detailed planning permission is sought for demolition of existing buildings 
and structures, and 23,286 sqm (GEA) of residential floorspace (up to 253 homes) 
arranged in three blocks 13 storeys, up to 774 sqm of flexible residential facilities and 
commercial uses with public open space; public realm works, landscaping and 
associated works. 
 
Case history 
13 A series of pre-planning application meetings have been held between the 
applicant, Tower Hamlets Council and the Greater London Authority on the above 
proposal at the above site. An initial meeting was held with the GLA on 21 May 2019, 
with a follow up meeting held on 13 September 2019. GLA officers concluded that 
whist the principle of a high-density mixed-use redevelopment on this brownfield site 
is supported in principle, issues raised with respect to housing; residential quality; 
affordable housing; urban design; climate change and transport are fully addressed 
prior to the submission of any planning application.   
 
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
14 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004, the development plan in force for the area is the Tower Hamlets Local Plan 
2031: Managing Growth and Sharing Benefits and the 2016 London Plan 
(Consolidated with Alterations since 2011). 
 
 
15 The following are relevant material considerations:   
• The National Planning Policy Framework;  
• National Planning Practice Guidance; and 
• The London Plan intend to publish version (December 2019).  
 
16 The relevant strategic issues and corresponding policies are as follows:  
• Opportunity Areas London Plan; 
• Employment London Plan; 
• Utilities and industrial use London Plan; 
• Social Infrastructure London Plan; 
• Housing London Plan; Housing SPG; Housing Strategy; 
Shaping Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal 
Recreation SPG;  
• Affordable housing London Plan; Affordable Housing & Viability SPG;    
• Urban design   London Plan; Character and Context SPG; 
• Historic Environment London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character 
and Context SPG 
• Inclusive access   London Plan; Accessible London SPG; 
• Sustainable development London Plan; Sustainable Design and Construction 
SPG; Mayor’s Environment Strategy; 
• Transport London Plan; the Mayor’s Transport Strategy. 
 
Principle of development 
Opportunity Area and residential use 
17 The site is within the emerging Poplar Riverside Opportunity Area, on the north 
side of the Thames Estuary. Policy SD1 of the Mayor’s Intend to Publish London Plan 
identifies the Poplar Riverside Opportunity Area as having the potential to provide 9,000 
new homes and 3,000 new jobs. Opportunity Areas within the Thames Estuary corridor 
are a priority for regeneration and economic development, with potential for over 
250,000 new homes and 200,000 new jobs. The site also lies within the Poplar 
Riverside Housing Zone which anticipates the creation of a minimum of 6,404 new 
homes within its lifetime and is intended to increase housing delivery in areas with 
significant infrastructure challenges and improve links to surrounding areas. Both the 
Intend to Publish London Plan and Housing Zone designation lend strong support to the 
provision of housing development in this area. 
 
18 The site is subject to Site Allocation 2.1 under the Tower Hamlets Local Plan. 
The site allocation identifies the site as suitable to provide a strategic housing 
development, a secondary school and publicly accessible open space, having regard for 
the local character and context and the implementation considerations arising from the 
site’s use as an operational gasworks.  
 
19 London Plan Policy 3.3 and Policy H1 of the Intend to Publish London Plan seek 
to increase the supply of housing in the capital. The proposed scheme would provide up 
to 1,286 homes, which equates to 34% of the annual monitoring target for Tower 