 page 1 
   
planning report GLA/5227/01  
10 February 2020 
Imperial Phase 3, Land at Imperial Street 
Bromley by Bow   
In the London Borough of Tower Hamlets (LLDC)  
planning application no. 19/00554/FUL 
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral  
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 
2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
The construction of a residential-led mixed use development comprising a series of buildings 
ranging from three to 14 storeys in height to provide 321 residential units, approximately 306 
sq.m. of flexible commercial and retail floorspace, and all associated infrastructure, access, 
and hard and soft landscaping (including the replacement of the adjacent river wall). 
The applicant 
The applicant is Guinness Developments Limited and the architect is PRP. 
Strategic issues summary 
Principle of development: The residential-led mixed use scheme within the Olympic Legacy 
Opportunity Area is strongly supported (paragraphs 15-17). 
Affordable housing: The application site (which comprises Phase 3 of the wider masterplan) 
would provide 22% affordable intermediate housing by habitable room with public subsidy; 
however, when combined with the separate proposed changes to Phase 2, the overall 
provision of affordable housing across the two phases would be 48%. The two phases must be 
linked by an overarching S106 agreement securing the quantum, tenure, affordability and 
delivery of the affordable housing. The applicant’s viability assessment and the Corporation’s 
independent review will be robustly scrutinised by GLA officers to ensure that the maximum 
amount of affordable housing is secured. (paragraphs 19-26). 
Heritage and urban design: The design is broadly supported and no harm would be caused 
to the setting of nearby heritage assets. Residential quality issues to be addressed 
(paragraphs 27-36). 
Environment: Further information is required on the energy strategy. (paragraphs 37-42). 
Transport: Further information on disabled parking and cycle parking are required; and, 
various contributions and transport-related plans to be secured (paragraphs 43-49).  
Recommendation 
That London Legacy Development Corporation be advised that whilst the principle of 
development is supported the application does not yet fully comply with the London Plan and 
Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan for the reasons set out in paragraph 53 of this report. 
However, the resolution of these issues could lead to the application becoming compliant with 
the London Plan and Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan. 

 page 2 
Context 
1 On 19 December 2019, the Mayor of London received documents from London 
Legacy Development Corporation notifying him of a planning application of potential 
strategic importance to develop the above site for the above uses. The application was 
validated on 6 January 2020. Under the provisions of The Town & Country Planning 
(Mayor of London) Order 2008 the Mayor has until 16 February 2020 to provide the 
Council with a statement setting out whether he considers that the application complies 
with the London Plan and draft London Plan, and his reasons for taking that view. The 
Mayor may also provide other comments. This report sets out information for the 
Mayor’s use in deciding what decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under Categories 1A, 1B and 1C of the Mayor of 
London Order 2008: 
• Category 1A: “Development which comprises or includes the provision of 
more than 150 houses, flats, or houses and flats.” 
• Category 1B: “Development (other than development which only comprises 
the provision of houses, flats, or houses and flats) which comprises or includes 
the erection of a building or buildings—(c) outside Central London and with a 
total floorspace of more than 15,000 square metres.” 
• Category 1C: “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a 
building of (c) more than 30 metres high and is outside the City of London.” 
3 Once London Legacy Development Corporation has resolved to determine the 
application, it is required to refer it back to the Mayor for his decision as to whether to 
direct refusal or allow the Corporation to determine it itself. 
4 The environmental information for the purposes of the Town and Country 
Planning (Environmental Impact Assessment) Regulations 2011 has been taken into 
account in the consideration of this case.  
5 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA 
website www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
6 Formerly industrial land, the application site is Phase 3 (Plot A) of a larger master 
planned parcel of land consisting of Phases 2 and 3 (Plots D1 and A) and the former 
Danescroft-owned site Phase 1 (Plot 2), now also under the ownership of the applicant. 
The application site is bound to the south by the London Underground District line, to 
the west by Plot 2 and the A12 beyond, and the River Lea to the east. To the north is 
Plot D1 and a Tesco store with surface car parking. See Figure 1 below. 
7 The site lies within the Olympic Legacy Opportunity Area. It is recognised by the 
LLDC as a key development site, and is formally allocated within the LLDC Local Plan 
(Site Allocation SA4.1: Bromley-by-Bow) for comprehensive mixed-use development 
including housing to contribute towards the creation of a new district centre, along with a 
new access route from the A12, improved linkages to the north and east, open space 
and a riverside walk. The site is not within a conservation area; however, the Three Mills 
Conservation Area is very close across the River Lea to the east and includes heritage 
 page 3 
assets, including the Grade I Listed Tide Mill (also known as House Mill) and the Grade 
II listed Offices Opposite Clock Mill and the Clock Mill. 
Figure 1: Site location 
 
8 The A12 forms part of the Transport for London Road Network (TLRN) and the 
nearest part of the Strategic Road Network (SRN) is Stratford High Street, 
approximately 600 metres away to the north. There are three bus services available 
within a 400-metre walk of the site - route 488 and D8 at bus stops on or adjacent to the 
A12 and route 323 on Devas Street.  
9 Bromley-by-Bow London Underground station is 100 metres away on the western 
side of the A12 and provides access to London Underground services on the District 
and Hammersmith & City lines. Two Docklands Light Railway stations, Bow Road and 
Devons Road are both approximately 700 metres away from the western edge of the 
sites. The closest cycle hire docking stations are both approximately 500 metres away 
from the site at Devons Road and Bromley High Street. The site therefore has a good 
public transport accessibility level (PTAL), with a score of 4 on a scale of 0 to 6b, where 
6b is the highest. 
 

 page 4 
Details of the proposal 
10 Guinness Developments Ltd, a subsidiary of The Guinness Partnership -a 
registered social housing provider and GLA Strategic Partner - proposes to redevelop 
the site to provide a residential-led development, involving the erection of 5 buildings, 
including 2 townhouse blocks, ranging in height from 3 to 14 storeys, comprising: 321 
new residential units; 300 sq.m. of commercial floorspace; Blue Badge and cycle 
parking; and associated landscaping. 
Case history 
11 GLA officers provided initial pre-application advice on this scheme on 17 
September 2019, covering strategic issues with respect to: principle of development, 
urban design, housing, affordable housing, inclusive access, sustainable 
development/climate change and transport. The pre-application advice note issued by 
the GLA strongly supported the principle of a residential-led mixed use scheme, subject 
to clarification of the proposed level of affordable housing, affordable tenure mix and 
affordability.  
12 Prior to this, a planning application was submitted to LLDC in 2017 for the 
redevelopment of the site (Plots A and D1) for 407 residential units and commercial 
space (ref: 17/00344/FUL)/GLA4415). The application was referred to the Mayor in 
August 2017. Following the Mayor’s Stage 1 report and subsequent negotiations on the 
affordable housing, LLDC decided to approve the application and in May 2018 the 
Mayor informed the Corporation that he was content for it to determine the case itself. 
Planning permission was issued on 20 June 2018. It should be noted that Phase 1 
(ref:17/00364/FUL/GLA4300) was also granted planning consent in 2018. 
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
8 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004, the development plan in force for the area comprises Legacy Development 
Corporation Local Plan (2015-2031) and, the London Plan 2016 (Consolidated with 
Alterations since 2011). 
13 The relevant issues and corresponding policies are as follows: 
• Opportunity Areas London Plan; Olympic Legacy SPG; 
• Employment land London Plan; Land for Industry and Transport SPG; 
• Housing/Affordable London Plan; Housing SPG; Housing Strategy; Shaping 
      housing Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal Recreation SPG; 
Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character and Context SPG; 
Affordable Housing and Viability SPG; 
• Urban design London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character      
and Context SPG; Housing SPG; Shaping 
Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal Recreation SPG; 
• Inclusive design London Plan; Accessible London: Achieving an Inclusive 
Environment SPG; 
• Environment London Plan; Sustainable Design and Construction SPG; 
Mayor’s Environment Strategy; 