 page 1 
  planning report GLA/4617/02 
16 December 2019 
Former Kew Biothane Plant  
in the London Borough of Richmond Upon Thames   
planning application no.  18/3310/FUL 
Strategic planning application stage II referral  
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 
2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Demolition of existing buildings and structures and redevelopment of the site to provide 
specialist older persons housing in a 4-6 storey building.  
The applicant 
The applicant is Red & Yellow and the architect is Marchese Partners.  
Key dates 
Stage 1 report: 19 November 2018 
Council’s Committee meeting: 24 July 2019 
Strategic issues 
x. 
The Council’s decision 
In this instance Richmond upon Thames Council has resolved to grant permission subject to 
planning conditions and conclusion of a Section 106 legal agreement. 
Recommendation 
That Richmond upon Thames Council be advised that the Mayor is content for it to determine 
the case itself, subject to any action that the Secretary of State may take, and does not 
therefore wish to direct refusal or direct that he is to be the local planning authority. 
 
  
 
 page 2 
Context 
1 On 19 October 2019 the Mayor of London received documents from Lambeth Council 
notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance to develop the above 
site for the above uses.  This was referred to the Mayor under Category 3D of the Schedule to 
the Order 2008:  
• ‘Development – on land allocated as Green Belt or Metropolitan Open Land in the 
development plan, in proposals for such a plan, or in proposals for the alteration or 
replacement of such a plan and would involve the construction of a building with a 
floorspace of more than 1,000 square metres or a material change of use of such a 
building’ 
 
2 On 19 November 2018 the Mayor considered planning report GLA/4617/01 and 
subsequently advised Richmond upon Thames Council that the application was acceptable in 
principle, but that it did not fully comply with the London Plan and draft London Plan for the 
reasons set out in paragraph 69 of the above-mentioned report.  However, the resolution of 
those issues could lead to the application being fully compliant with the London Plan and 
draft London Plan. 
3 A copy of the above-mentioned report is attached.  The essentials of the case with 
regard to the proposal, the site, case history, strategic planning issues and relevant policies and 
guidance are as set out therein, unless otherwise stated in this report.  On 24 July 2019 
Richmond upon Thames Council decided that it was minded to grant planning permission and 
on XXXX it advised the Mayor of this decision.  Under the provisions of Article 5 of the Town & 
Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 the Mayor may allow the draft decision to 
proceed unchanged, or direct  Richmond upon Thames Council under Article 6 to refuse the 
application.   The Mayor has until XXX 2019 to notify the Council of his decision and to issue any 
direction.   
4 The decision on this case, and the reasons, will be made available on the GLA’s website 
www.london.gov.uk. 
Consultation stage issues summary 
5 At consultation stage, Richmond upon Thames Council was advised that the application 
does not comply with the London Plan and draft London Plan. The following strategic issues 
must be addressed for the application to fully accord with the London Plan and draft London 
Plan: 
• Metropolitan Open Land: The proposal includes inappropriate development on 
Metropolitan Open Land. The applicant must demonstrate that very special 
circumstances exist to justify development on Metropolitan Open Land.  
• Specialist Older Persons Housing: Provision of specialist older persons housing in the 
form of extra care accommodation is strongly supported. As the buildings afford the 
facilities required for day to day self-contained private domestic existence it is 
considered that the proposal falls within Use Class C3 of the Town and Country Planning 
(Use Classes Order) 1987.  
 page 3 
• Affordable housing: As it is considered that the proposed extra care accommodation 
constitutes C3 residential under the Use Classes Order 1987 the Mayor’s Housing SPG, 
draft London Plan and London Plan affordable housing policies apply therefore, the nil 
on-site affordable housing provision is unacceptable. The submitted viability assessment 
is not considered to meet the Mayor’s SPG nor the NPPG. A compliant viability 
assessment must be submitted for robust interrogation by GLA officers to ensure that 
the maximum contribution is delivered in accordance with the London Plan and the 
draft London Plan. Early and late stage review mechanisms must be secured as 
necessary.  
• Design: The scheme delivers high quality design. The applicant should consider further 
revisions to minimise impact on the MOL.    
• Inclusive design: The scheme must be revised to incorporate the highest standards of 
accessibility and inclusive design.  
• Energy: Thee applicant must explore the potential for additional measures to deliver 
further carbon dioxide reductions. Once all opportunities for securing further feasible 
on-site savings have been exhausted, a carbon offset contribution should be secured to 
mitigate any residual shortfall.  
• Water: Further information required to demonstrate the scheme meets London Plan 
and draft London Plan drainage policies. The scheme must be revised to ensure it meets 
water consumption targets.  
• Transport: a revised transport assessment must be submitted. The quantum of cycle 
spaces for staff and visitors and passive electric vehicle charging points must be 
increased Conditions and Section 106 obligations are required to secure the following; 
delivery and servicing plan; travel plan and construction and logistics plan.   
 
Update 
 
6 Since Stage 1, GLA officers have reviewed further information, and engaged in 
discussions with the applicant and Lambeth Council with a view to addressing the outstanding 
matters.  Furthermore, as part of the Council’s draft decision on the case, various planning 
conditions and obligations have been proposed to ensure that the development is acceptable in 
planning terms. 
Metropolitan Open Land 
7 Whilst the development is proposed on Metropolitan Open Land, as reported at Stage 1, 
the development takes place entirely on previously developed land.  Therefore, consideration 
has been given to whether the development meets the exception test g) under paragraph 145 
of the NPPF as follows: 
‘Limited infilling or the partial or complete redevelopment of previously developed land, 
whether redundant or in continuing use (excluding temporary buildings), which would:  
• not have a greater impact on the openness of the Green Belt than the existing 
development; or  
 page 4 
• not cause substantial harm to the openness of the Green Belt, where the development 
would re-use previously developed land and contribute to meeting an identified 
affordable housing need within the area of the local planning authority.’ 
8 It was concluded that due to the proposed massing having a significantly larger presence 
than the existing structures on site, the development would have a greater impact on the 
openness of the MOL as perceived in key views but the impact of the development on the 
openness of the MOL albeit, the level of harm was not considered to be substantial.  Given that 
it would not have a substantial impact on openness, and is entirely on previously developed 
land, the last test would be whether it would contribute to an identified affordable housing 
need.  At consultation stage, the applicant had yet to put forward an affordable housing offer.  
Therefore, the development was not deemed to have fully met the exception test and would 
constitute inappropriate development in the MOL whereby development would only be 
acceptable should ‘very special circumstances’ exist to outweigh the impact of the 
development on MOL.  The public benefits offered by the development included a net gain of 
publicly accessible landscaped MOL, that would enhance connectivity to the river walkway, 
including a small-scale children’s play park, that would also be linked to public cafe facilities 
within the extra care building.  However, these were not considered to be sufficient to 
outweigh harm to the MOL.  As such, the proposed development on the MOL was deemed 
unacceptable in terms of the NPPF, London Plan Policy 7.16 and draft London Plan Policy G3.   
9 Following Stage 1, the applicant has made an offer of £1,146,259 towards affordable 
housing this offer was made on the basis that the carbon offset payment was also diverted 
towards affordable housing.   
10 The public benefits package has not substantively changed with the exception of the 
provision of a payment in lieu of affordable housing, which is discussed in more detail in the 
following section of this report.  
11 Since the initial consultation stage, the applicant has undertaken further analysis in 
relation to sustainable development mitigation and adaptation matters in order to ensure 
compliance with the London Plan and draft London Plan energy and flood risk policies.    
12 Clarification has been provided on the buildings cooling demand, overheating risk and 
the communal heat network to address the queries raised at Stage 1. In the updated proposal, 
PV has been omitted from the roof of the building.  While the applicant was asked to maximise 
the roofs potential for PV, it is accepted that following necessary revision to the roof design 
there is very limited potential for PV on the remaining roof area.  
13 After the additional information, the proposal is generally in accordance with the 
London Plan and draft London Plan energy policies. In addition, conditions have been included 
requiring a revised Sustainability Statement and Energy Statement.  
14 In response to Stage 1 concerns regarding flooring and surface water it has been 
demonstrated that the finished floor level of the proposed building is over 600mm above the 
maximum likely water level adjacent the site. Flood resilience measures are therefore not 
required at The Core building. Nevertheless, a condition requiring a flood evacuation plan and 
flood resilient construction measures have been included. The approach to flood risk 
management therefore complies with the requirements of the London Plan policy 5.12.  