 page 1 
  
planning report GLA/5387/01 
 10 February 2020 
72 – 76 Broadway, West Ealing 
in the London Borough of Ealing  
planning application no. 193500FUL  
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 
and 2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 
The proposal 
Mixed-use redevelopment of the site to include 56 homes alongside 393 sqm of 
commercial floor space on the ground floor (A1 Use Class), amenity space, and 
associated cycle and car parking. The proposed development would be nine-storeys.  
The applicant 
The applicant is Broadway Regen Ltd and the architect is Hester Architects 
Limited. 
Strategic issues 
Principle of development: The residential-led redevelopment and intensification of 
this brownfield town-centre site is supported in principle (paragraphs 14-20). 
Housing: The proposed 37% affordable housing offer is Fast Track eligible subject to 
LPA agreement on the tenure split (53:47 in favour of affordable rent). An early stage 
review should be secured as part of the Section 106 agreement. The playspace 
provision should be demonstrated and secured by condition (paragraphs 21-32). 
Urban design: While the proposed density, height, and massing are generally 
supported, the under-provision of private amenity space and number of north-facing 
single aspect dwellings raise strategic concerns (paragraphs 33-40). 
Sustainable development: Further information and justification are required in 
respect of energy, water infrastructure, and urban greening (paragraphs 43-53). 
Transport: The applicant is required to address issues in respect of car parking, cycle 
parking and healthy streets; and to provide more detail with respect to the outline 
construction management plan. The Council must secure a car parking management 
plan, disabled parking provision, cycle parking, and delivery and servicing plans by 
condition/obligation (paragraphs 54-63). 
Recommendation 
That Ealing Council be advised that while the application is supported in principle it 
does not currently comply with the London Plan and London Plan Intend to Publish 
Version, for the reasons set out in paragraph 67 of this report. Addressing these 
deficiencies may lead to the application becoming policy complaint. 
 
 page 2 
Context 
1 On 7 January 2020 the Mayor of London received documents from Ealing 
Council notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance to 
develop the above site for the above uses. Under the provisions of The Town & Country 
Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 the Mayor has until 18 February 2020 to 
provide the Council with a statement setting out whether he considers that the 
application complies with the London Plan, and his reasons for taking that view. The 
Mayor may also provide other comments. This report sets out information for the 
Mayor’s use in deciding what decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under the following Category of the Schedule to the 
Order 2008:  
• Category 1C: “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a 
building of…more than 30 metres high and is outside the City of London” 
3 Once Ealing Council has resolved to determine the application, it is required to 
refer it back to the Mayor for his decision as to whether to direct refusal; take it over for 
his own determination; or allow the Council to determine it itself. 
4 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA 
website www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
5 The 0.18-hectare site is located in the London Borough of Ealing on the north 
side of Broadway (A4020). It is bounded by Broadway to the south, and adjoining sites 
to the north, east, and west with access to Singapore Road from the rear of the site.  
6 The site is located within 500m of West Ealing Station, which has services to 
Paddington, Heathrow, and Reading. The site is further served by four daytime bus 
routes and two night-time bus routes. As a result, the site has a PTAL of 5 on a scale of 
0 to 6b, where 6b is the most accessible.   
7 The site currently comprises a terraced block with 1,231 sqm of retail on the 
ground and first floors and three short-term private market rented residential units above 
76a Broadway. There is vehicular access to a hard-surfaced car park to the rear of the 
site from Singapore Road. The building is red brick with metal cladding and is of no 
architectural significance.  
8 The site is situated within a 0.27-hectare parcel of privately-owned land currently 
listed in LB Ealing’s Brownfield Land Register and is allocated as a development site in 
the Development Sites DPD. The site is designated a primary shop frontage and falls 
within Ealing Metropolitan Centre in the London Plan Town Centre Network.  
 page 3 
Details of the proposal 
9 The applicant is seeking permission to demolish the existing buildings and erect 
a part five, part nine-storey mixed-use building to include 56 new homes and four retail 
units. The proposed retail offer comprises 393 sqm of A1 Use Class floor space on the 
ground level fronting onto the high street. The proposed residential offer is arranged 
over the ground to ninth levels and includes amenity space and cycle and car parking. 
Case history 
10 There is no strategic planning case history associated with this site.  
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
11 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004, the development plan in force for the area is the Ealing’s Development Strategy 
2026 (2012); Development Management Plan DPD (2013); Development Sites DPD 
(2013); and the 2016 London Plan (Consolidated with Alterations since 2011). 
12 The following are relevant material considerations:   
• The National Planning Policy Framework and National Planning Practice 
Guidance.  
• The London Plan (Intend to Publish Version, December 2019), which should be 
taken into account on the basis explained in paragraph 48 of the NPPF. 
• West Ealing Centre Neighbourhood Plan (2018) 
 
13 The following are relevant strategic issues and policies:   
• Land use principles London Plan;  
• Town Centres London Plan; Town Centres SPG. 
• Housing London Plan; Housing SPG; Shaping 
Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal Recreation SPG; 
Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character and Context 
SPG; Affordable Housing and Viability SPG; 
• Urban design London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character 
and Context SPG; Housing SPG; Play and Informal 
Recreation SPG. 
• Inclusive access London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Accessible 
London: Achieving an Inclusive Environment SPG; 
• Sustainable development London Plan; Sustainable Design and Construction 
SPG; Mayor’s Environment Strategy; 
• Transport London Plan; the Mayor’s Transport Strategy.  
 
 page 4 
Principle of development  
Town Centre  
14 The site is within Ealing Metropolitan Centre, which is a strategic level town 
centre designation. London Plan Policies 2.15, 4.7 and London Plan Intend to Publish 
Version Policy SD6 all set out a town centre first approach. The London Plan 
establishes that town centres should be the main foci beyond the Central Activities Zone 
for commercial development and intensification, including residential development; and 
that the scale of retail and commercial development should be related to the size, role, 
and function of a town centre and its catchment. The proposal includes a net loss of 
retail floorspace to accommodate a significant uplift in residential floorspace, as 
indicated in the table below. The London Plan Intend to Publish Version notes that 
changing retail trends may present opportunities in town centres and associated high 
streets to transition a surplus retail floorspace to other uses including more intensive 
forms of mixed-use development that include a residential component, in appropriate 
locations. For this reason and noting the quality and flexibility of the replacement retail 
floorspace, the proposed net loss in residential floorspace at this site does not raise any 
strategic concerns. 
 Existing Proposed Difference 
Retail floorspace 1,231 sqm 393 sqm - 838 sqm 
Residential floorspace 240 sqm 4,944 sqm + 4,704 sqm 
Table 1 - Net loss/gain of retail and residential floorspace 
15 The London Plan and London Plan Intend to Publish Version also indicate that 
retail and residential development in town centres can co-locate where higher-density, 
mixed-use development is proposed, provided that a high-quality environment is 
created; therefore, the co-location of residential and retail use is strongly supported in 
principle.  
Housing  
16  London Plan Policy 3.3 and London Plan Intend to Publish Version Policy H1 
seek to increase London’s supply of housing and, in order to do so, sets each borough 
a housing target. The 2016 London Plan sets a target of 1,297 additional homes per 
year between 2015 and 2025. The London Plan Intend to Publish Version apportions 
Ealing a 10-year housing target of 21,570 new homes. This proposal would contribute 
positively to these targets. 
17 London Plan Policy 3.3 and London Plan Intend to Publish Version Policy H1 
seek to optimise housing potential Policy 3.3 directs that boroughs identify and seek to 
enable additional development capacity to be brought forward Policy H1 states 
boroughs should optimise the potential for housing delivery on all suitable and available 
brownfield sites through their Development Plans and planning decisions.  
18 The proposed development would provide 53 new homes. This would equate 4% 
of the annual target for the Borough as set out in the London Plan. The residential 
intensification of this accessible, under-utilised site that will provide a mixture of units, 
including affordable family sized accommodation, is supported and in accordance with 
policies 3.3 of the London Plan and H1 and H12 of the London Plan Intend to Publish 
Version and would also assist Ealing Council in meeting its London Plan 10-year 