 page 1 
  planning report D&P/3403a/01  
  1 September 2016 
60 Sloane Avenue 
in the Royal Borough of Kensington & Chelsea  
planning application no. PP/16/03878  
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 2007; 
Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Demolition behind part retained facades and redevelopment of the site to provide a 7 storey 
mixed use residential (49 units), retail and leisure development, including 3 basement storeys 
providing off-street car parking, leisure and retail space, plant and cycle parking. 
The applicant 
The applicant is SA Ltd, the architect is David Chipperfield, and the agent is Savills. 
Key dates 
Pre-application meeting:  12 November 2015. 
Strategic issues summary 
Employment and town centre uses:  Although office space will be lost at 60 Sloane Avenue; a 
greater amount of office floorspace will be re-provided in a designated employment zone at 253-
261 Kensal Road, together with a significant potential uplift in jobs, which is supported.  
Consideration should be given to affordable workspace at Kensal Road (paragraphs 14-19). 
Affordable housing:  The applicant states that a cash-in-lieu contribution of £5M for affordable 
housing is proposed.  Notwithstanding the applicant’s assertion that substantial cross-funding is 
required to re-provide workspace off-site, GLA officers note the very high values that are 
achievable at the Sloane Avenue site, as well as the very large floorspace of some of the units 
proposed, and consider that a higher contribution should be possible.  The Council’s independent 
assessment of the applicant’s financial viability assessment should be shared with GLA officers 
before the application is referred back to the Mayor (paragraphs 22-26). 
Urban design:  The layout, height and massing of the scheme, and the architectural approach of 
replicating the design and materials of the retained facades is supported (paragraphs 31-33). 
Transport: Car parking is considered excessive given the location and should be reduced 
(paragraphs 40-45). 
Recommendation 
That Kensington & Chelsea Council be advised that the application does not yet comply with the 
London Plan, for the reasons set out in paragraph 57 of this report; but that the possible remedies 
set out in that paragraph could address these deficiencies. 
 
 page 2 
Context 
1 On 4 July 2016, the Mayor of London received documents from Kensington & Chelsea  
Council notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance to develop the 
above site for the above uses.  Under the provisions of The Town & Country Planning (Mayor of 
London) Order 2008, the Mayor has to provide the Council with a statement setting out whether 
he considers that the application complies with the London Plan, and his reasons for taking that 
view.  The Mayor may also provide other comments.  This report sets out information for the 
Mayor’s use in deciding what decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under Categories 1B(c) and 3E of the Mayor of London Order 
2008: 
 “1B(c) Development which comprises or includes the erection of a building outside Central 
London and with a total floorspace of more than 15,000 square metres”. 
 “3E Development (a) which does not accord with one or more provisions of the development 
plan in force in the area in which the application site is situated; and (b) comprises or 
includes the provision of more than 2,500 square metres of floorspace for a use falling 
within the following classes in the Use Classes Order (i) class A1 (retail); (iii) class A3 (food 
and drink); (xii) class D2 (assembly and leisure).” 
3 Once Kensington & Chelsea Council has resolved to determine the application, it is required 
to refer it back to the Mayor for his decision as to whether to direct refusal; take it over for his own 
determination; or allow the Council to determine it itself. 
4 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA website 
www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
5 Currently the 0.25 hectare site contains the five storey terracotta-tile-clad former Harrods 
‘Motor Car Garage and Workshops’ building, dating to 1911, with 1994 glass and steel additions by 
Stanton Williams, and further additions in 2008.  The building currently comprises ground floor 
retail and commercial office space above.   
6 The site is located on the northern side of Sloane Avenue, with Draycott Avenue to the 
north, and Ixworth Place to the west.  To the east, the site is bounded by the site of 
Marlborough Primary School, which has been demolished and a new school is under 
construction.  The site is within the Fulham Road East town centre, which is classified as a 
District centre in the London Plan.  There is a wide mix of different building types, scales, ages 
and land uses in the area, including residential, commercial and retail.   
 
7  The site is located within South Kensington, in a rare pocket of the Borough that is not a 
designated conservation area.  The nearest listed building is the Grade II listed former Michelin 
building to the west of the site, fronting onto Fulham Road. 
8 Sloane Avenue, Draycott Avenue and Ixworth Place all form part of the local road 
network.  The nearest part of the Transport for London Road Network (TLRN) is approximately 
500 metres away (Cromwell Road A4) and the nearest part of the Strategic Road Network (SRN) 
is Brompton Road (Brompton Road/Sloane Avenue junction), which lies is similar distance away.  
The site is well served by buses with 14 routes stopping nearby.  The nearest station is South 
Kensington (London Underground) which is approximately 500 metres from the site.  Measured 
on a scale of 1a – 6b where 6b is the highest, the site has a PTAL rating of 6a, which is 
 page 3 
considered excellent.  Docking stations in the vicinity of the site are experiencing high levels of 
demand, with the nearest being on Sloane Avenue. 
 
Details of the proposal 
9 The proposal seeks to demolish the existing building, retaining the terracotta-tile facades, 
and construct a new building replicating these facades on the remainder of the site.  The new 7 
storey building would provide a mixed use residential (49 units), retail and leisure scheme, 
including 3 basement storeys to provide off-street car parking, leisure and retail space, plant and 
cycle parking.  The residential units are arranged around an internal atrium/courtyard. 
Case history 
10 On 12 November 2015, a pre-application meeting was held at City Hall for a detailed 
application for the redevelopment of 60 Sloane Avenue for a mix of retail, leisure and residential 
uses, with off-site office use at 253-261 Kensal Road.  The GLA’s pre-application advice report 
of 9 December 2015 concluded that the principle of the proposal was supported, subject to the 
assessment of viability, justification regarding the mix of housing, and further information 
regarding heritage and urban design, particularly residential quality of the courtyard space, 
transport, and climate change. 
 
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
11 The relevant issues and corresponding policies are as follows:  
 Employment London Plan 
 Mix of uses London Plan 
 Town centre uses London Plan; Town Centres SPG  
 Housing London Plan; Housing SPG; Housing Strategy; Shaping 
Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal Recreation SPG; Shaping 
Neighbourhoods: Character and Context SPG 
 Affordable housing London Plan; Housing SPG; Housing Strategy  
 Density London Plan; Housing SPG 
 Historic Environment London Plan 
 Urban design London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character and Context, 
SPG; Housing SPG; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal 
Recreation SPG 
 Inclusive design London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Accessible London: 
Achieving an Inclusive Environment SPG 
 Transport London Plan; Mayor’s Transport Strategy 
 Parking London Plan; Mayor’s Transport Strategy  
 Crossrail London Plan; Mayoral Community Infrastructure Levy; Crossrail 
SPG 
 Climate change London Plan; Sustainable Design and Construction SPG; Mayor’s 
Climate Change Adaptation Strategy; Mayor’s Climate Change 
Mitigation and Energy Strategy; Mayor’s Water Strategy  
 Air quality London Plan; the Mayor’s Air Quality Strategy; Control of dust 
and emissions during construction and demolition SPG 
 
12 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, the 
development plan in force for the area is the Royal Borough of Kensington & Chelsea Consolidated 
 page 4 
Local Plan (2015), Extant Policies from the Unitary Development Plan (2002), and the 2016 
London Plan (Consolidated with Alterations since 2011).   
13 The National Planning Policy Framework, Technical Guide to the National Planning Policy 
Framework and National Planning Practice Guidance are also relevant material considerations. 
Principle of development 
Employment and town centre uses 
14 The building is currently a mix of office, retail and leisure uses.  The office element is 
arranged over four floors totalling 8,133 sq.m. G(IA) with retail providing 1,713 sq.m. and leisure 
providing 1,632 sq.m.  The applicant states that the building provides large office floorplates that 
are difficult to divide into smaller spaces owing to the large single centralised core arrangement.  
Sub-dividing the space into smaller offices would therefore result in large amounts of space 
inefficiently required for internal circulation and access.  Furthermore, the services arrangement 
would need to be substantially upgraded to meet current standards and to service a series of 
smaller office spaces.  The applicant states that a number of tenants have now vacated the building 
as it does not meet their requirements.  Market evidence is also provided stating that floorplates of 
this size are significantly larger than market requirements in this area. 
15 Consequently, the applicant proposes that the new building would contain no office space 
and would instead be predominately residential, with an element of retail and leisure space.  As a 
result of extensive discussions with the Council to find a site to replace this lost employment space, 
the applicant is proposing to re-provide a greater level of office space off-site in a designated 
employment zone at 253-261 Kensal Road, as shown below.  A planning application for 253-261 
Kensal Road has been submitted to the Council alongside this application, and will be linked 
through a section 106 agreement.   
Gross internal area 
(GIA) sq.m. 
Existing  Proposed  Net additional 
scheme space  
60 Sloane Avenue  
Retail  1,713  2,646  933  
Leisure  1,632  1,932  300  
Commercial (B1 
Office)  
8,133  0  -8,133  
Residential  0  14,155  14,155  
Total  11,478  18,733  7,255  
253-261 Kensal Road  
Retail  0  293  293  
Commercial (B1 
Office)  
0  13,280  13,280  
Commercial (B2 
Industrial) not in 
use  
2,575  0  -2,575  
Total  2,575  13,573  10,998  
 
16 This demonstrates that an additional 1,226 sq.m. of retail space, 300 sq.m. of leisure space, 
and 2,572 sq.m. of commercial space would be provided across the two sites.  The applicant also 
calculates that across the two sites these uses could potentially generate an additional 284 jobs 
once operational (101 retail, 39 leisure and 144 commercial jobs) compared to the current 
situation. 