 page 1 
 planning report GLA/4316a/02  
  3 February 2020 
304-312 High Street 
in the London Borough of Newham (London Legacy Development 
Corporation)  
planning application no. 19/00291/FUL 
Strategic planning application stage II referral  
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 
and 2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Demolition of existing buildings and construction of a part seven part 19/22-storey 
mixed-use building (maximum height 81.65 metres) to provide a 287-room hotel (Class 
C1) and 782.56 sq.m. office and co-working floorspace (flexible Class B1a/c) and 
ancillary landscaping and associated plant.  
The applicant 
The applicant is The Collective and the architect is PLP Architecture  
Key dates 
Preapplication meeting: 12 June 2019 
Stage I Report: 16 September 2019 
Committee Meeting: 18 December 2019 
Strategic issues summary 
Principle of development:  The proposed hotel and co-working office space in this 
accessible, edge of town centre location within the Lower Lea Valley Opportunity Area is 
supported in strategic planning terms. The maximum period of stay for hotel guests has been 
secured within the section 106 heads of terms (paragraph 9). 
Urban design: Conditions and section 106 obligations have been secured regarding detailed 
design, materials, public realm management and landscape works to the Channelsea River 
(paragraphs 10-12). 
Transport: Transport issues resolved; a £400,000 contribution has been secured via section 
106 towards station improvement works at Stratford Regional Station (paragraphs 18 & 19). 
Outstanding energy and sustainable development issues have been addressed (paragraphs 
14-17). 
The Corporation’s decision 
In this instance, the London Legacy Development Corporation has resolved to grant 
permission, subject to conditions. 
Recommendation 
That the Corporation be advised that the Mayor is content for it to determine the case 
itself, subject to any action that the Secretary of State may take and does not therefore 
wish to direct refusa.. 
 
 
 page 2 
Context 
1 On 13 April 2019, the Mayor of London received documents from the London 
Legacy Development Corporation notifying him of a planning application of potential 
strategic importance to develop the above site for the above uses.  This was referred to 
the Mayor under Categories 1B & 1C of the Schedule to the 2008 Order: 
• 1B(c) – Development (other than development which only comprises the 
provision of houses, flats or houses and flats) which comprises or includes the 
erection of a building or buildings outside of Central London and with a total 
floorspace of more than 15,000 square metres.” 
• 1C(c) “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a building that is 
more than 30 metres high outside the City of London.” 
2 On 16 September 2019, the Mayor considered planning report D&P/4316a/01, 
and subsequently advised the Corporation that the application did not yet comply with 
the London Plan, for the reasons set out in paragraph 60 of the above-mentioned report 
(attached); but that the possible remedies set out in that paragraph could address these 
deficiencies. 
3 A copy of the above-mentioned report is attached.  The essentials of the case 
with regard to the proposal, the site, case history, strategic planning issues and relevant 
policies and guidance are as set out therein, unless otherwise stated in this report.  
Since then, further information has been provided in response to the Mayor’s concerns 
and the application has been amended (see below).   
4 On 18 December 2019, the Corporation decided that it was minded to grant 
permission, subject to conditions and a section 106 agreement, and on 20 January 
2020 it advised the Mayor of this decision.  Under the provisions of Article 5 of the 
Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008, the Mayor may allow the 
draft decision to proceed unchanged, direct the Corporation under Article 6 to refuse 
the application. The Mayor has until 3 February 2020 to notify the Council of his 
decision and to issue any direction.   
 
Consultation stage issues summary 
 
5 At consultation stage, the Corporation was advised that while the application 
was supported in principle, it did not yet comply with the London Plan for the reasons 
set out below;   
• Land use principles: the proposed hotel and co-working office space in this 
accessible, edge of town centre location within the Lower Lea Valley Opportunity 
Area is supported in strategic planning terms. The maximum period of stay for 
hotel guests must be secured within a S106 agreement. 
 page 3 
• Urban design and heritage: The contributions towards public realm and 
pedestrian permeability are welcomed. The proposed heights are supported 
subject to robust conditions securing high-quality materials. Whilst there would 
be some harm to existing heritage assets, GLA officers consider this harm to be 
less than substantial and outweighed by both the heritage benefits and the wider 
public benefits arising from the proposals. 
• Inclusive design: In line with London Plan Policy 4.5 and draft London Plan 
Policy E10, 10% of the hotel rooms and all communal areas must be fully 
wheelchair accessible. This should be secured by condition.  
• Transport: Further information is required on servicing trips, impact on Stratford 
Station,  taxi drop-off and Road Safety Audit for the main proposed vehicle 
access as well as the relocation of visitor cycle parking.  
• Sustainable development: Further information is required regarding energy 
efficiency measures, carbon savings, cooling and overheating, renewable 
technologies, flood risk management and sustainable drainage, and urban 
greening.  
6 The decision on this case, and the reasons will be made available on the 
GLA’s website www.london.gov.uk. 
 
Strategic planning policy and guidance update 
 
7 The following draft policy and guidance are now material considerations: 
• The National Planning Policy Framework February 2019 and National Planning 
Practice Guidance. 
• The Report of the Examination in Public of the draft London Plan was 
published in October 2019 and, 
•  The Intend to Publish London Plan (December 2019). This should be taken 
into account on the basis described in the NPPF.  
 
Application update 
 
8 Since consultation stage, GLA officers have engaged in discussions with the 
applicant, the Corporation and TfL officers with a view to addressing the above 
matters.  Furthermore, as part of the Corporation’s draft decision on the case, various 
planning conditions and section 106 obligations have been proposed to address the 
above concerns and ensure that the development is acceptable in planning terms. 
 
Principle of development 
 
9 At consultation stage, the proposed redevelopment of the site to provide 287-
bedroom hotel, office and co-working space, was supported in principle. In line with 
Stage 1 comments, a Hotel Management Strategy has been secured via the section 
106 agreement. This strategy must ensure that the proposed development is used 
solely as a hotel under Class C1 (and not for residential use under Class C3) and 
restricts length of stay to no longer than 90 days within a 12-month period. These 
controls are acceptable.  
 
 
 page 4 
Urban design  
 
10 At consultation stage, further information was requested regarding the 
management of the riverside garden, including how this area would be secured out of 
hours to ensure pedestrian safety and avoid any risk of anti-social behaviour. In 
response to these comments, a Public Realm Management Strategy has been 
secured via the section 106 agreement, to include measures relating to public 
accessibility, management, access arrangements and out of hours emergency. The 
delivery and layout of the Channelsea River landscape works and public access 
through the site to this area have also been secured within the section106.  
 
11 Conditions relating to detailed design and materials have been secured to 
ensure an exemplary design is delivered. A section 106 obligation also requires the 
retention of the scheme architects, or an equally qualified architect as agreed in 
writing by the LLDC.  
 
12 In line with Policy D12 of the Mayor’s Intend to Publish London Plan, condition 
48 requires the submission of a further Fire Strategy for approval. 
 
Inclusive design 
 
13 10% of hotel rooms have been secured as wheelchair accessible, in line with 
London Plan Policy 4.5 and draft London Plan Policy E10.  
 
Energy 
 
14 Since Stage 1, the applicant has engaged with the GLA’s energy team to 
resolve the outstanding issues. Additional information has been provided regarding 
cooling and heating, the proposed energy centre and heat pumps. Further details of 
PV panels have been secured by condition to ensure their provision is maximised. 
The section 106 agreement includes a commitment to future-proof the development 
to allow connection to a district heat network, the use of reasonable endeavours to 
connect to the QEOP District Heat network, and an updated energy strategy and 
carbon offset payment, if required.   
 
15 Based on the revised energy assessment submitted, the proposal would 
achieve a 36% reduction in regulated carbon dioxide emissions and therefore 
exceeds the targets within London Plan Policy 5.2 and Policy S13 of the intend to 
publish London Plan.  
 
Sustainable development  
 
16 In response to consultation comments, additional information has been 
provided relating to surface water drainage, storage and SuDs measures. Runoff 
rates into the Channelsea River are accepted and the applicant has demonstrated 
that, in context of the site constraints, the use of SuDs measures to reduce runoff and 
maximise additional attenuation storage have been maximised. Notwithstanding this, 
conditions requiring the submission of a Surface Water Strategy, Foul Drainage and 
Drainage Strategy have been secured.  
 