 page 1 
 
 
planning report GLA/5235/01  
2 March 2020 
Site at 1-8 Capitol Way 
in the London Borough of Brent  
planning application no. 19/4545 
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 
and 2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Redevelopment of the site for mixed use development to provide 4,051sq.m. of flexible 
commercial floorspace (B1(a), (b) and (c), B8, D2 and A3) and 501 residential units 
including a mix of studio, 1, 2, 3 and 4-bedroom units with associated basement car 
parking and cycle storage. 
The applicant 
The applicant is NEAT Developments and Royal London Asset Management and the 
architect is Dunnett Craven Architects.  
Strategic issues 
Principle of development: The principle of the re-development of this site for residential 
led mixed-use development with a proportion of suitable replacement industrial floorspace 
is supported given the extant consent for similar land uses. The industrial use of Building 
F should be secured (paragraphs 17 to 23). 
Housing and affordable housing: 501 units are proposed, representing an uplift of 87 
units compared to the previous consent. 36% affordable housing is proposed, which does 
not meet the 50% Fast Track Route requirement for this industrial site. The applicant’s 
Financial Viability Assessment is undergoing robust assessment to ensure that the 
maximum contribution is secured (paragraphs 24 to 30).   
Design: The approach to the building height, massing and scale is supported and the 
design is of a good quality. The design of the industrial floorspace and the annexe site 
floorspace is suitably designed to meet industrial user requirements (paragraphs 36 to 
46)   
Sustainable development: Further work is required and evidence submitted in relation 
to energy, flood risk and green infrastructure (paragraphs 49 to 54). 
Transport: The application is broadly supported in strategic planning terms. Contributions 
and conditions are required (paragraphs 56-60).  
Recommendation: That Brent Council be advised that whilst the principle of 
development is supported the application does not fully comply with the London Plan, for 
the reasons set out in paragraph 64 of this report; but that the possible remedies set out 
in that paragraph of this report could address these deficiencies. 
 
 page 2 
Context 
1 On 8 January 2020 the Mayor of London received documents from Brent Council 
notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance to develop the 
above site for the above uses. Under the provisions of The Town & Country Planning 
(Mayor of London) Order 2008, the Mayor must provide the Council with a statement 
setting out whether he considers that the application complies with the London Plan, 
and his reasons for taking that view. The Mayor may also provide other comments. This 
report sets out information for the Mayor’s use in deciding what decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under Categories 1A.1 and 1C(c) of the Schedule to 
the Order 2008: 
1A.1 ‘Development which comprises or includes the provision of more than 150 houses, 
flats or houses and flats.’  
 1C(c) ‘Development which comprises or includes the erection of a building that is more 
than 30 metres high and is outside the City of London.’ 
3 Once the Council has resolved to determine the application, it is required to refer 
it back to the Mayor for his decision as to whether to direct refusal; take it over for his 
own determination; or allow the Council to determine it itself.  
4 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA 
website www.london.gov.uk.  
Site description 
5 The site is approximately 1.7 hectare in size and is part of Capitol Way 
industrial estate. The site is ‘L’ shaped and consists of two detached areas (referred 
to as the ‘main site’ and the ‘satellite site’), separated by Capitol Way. The 1.56 
hectare main site is the northern plot and is covered predominantly by a single storey 
warehouse (B8 use), with attached administrative building, which has been vacant for 
over 5 years. The satellite site is located to the south of the main site and consists of 
a bituminous bound area of hard standing and a vegetated bank with existing trees 
that runs along the eastern side of Stag Lane. 
 
6 The Capitol Way industrial estate forms part of the Colindale Locally Significant 
Industrial Site (LSIS) as designated within Brent Council’s Core Strategy. A number 
of sites on the edge of the estate fronting on to Edgware Road have recently 
undergone redevelopment for mixed use residential/commercial development. These 
sites include the Oriental City site, approximately 300 metres to the south east of the 
site, and the TNQ development on Capitol Way to the east.  
 
7 The site is within the Colindale/Burnt Oak Opportunity Area. The nearest 
designated heritage asset is the Roe Green Conservation Area, which begins 
approximately 140 metres south of the site on the western side of Stag Lane. 
 
8 The nearest section of the Transport for London Road Network (TLRN) is the 
Watford Way/A41, located approximately 2.2 kilometres to the east of the site and the 
nearest section of the Strategic Road Network (SRN) is Edgware Road/A5, located 
approximately 300 metres to the east.  The nearest London Underground station is 
 page 3 
Burnt Oak, 900 metres north of the site, which is served by the Northern line. The 
Public Transport Access Level (PTAL) of the site is rated at 2 (on a scale where 1a is 
the lowest and 6b the highest). Two bus routes currently directly serve the site from a 
stop on adjacent Stag Lane, one of which TfL will re-route onto Capitol Way and 
onwards to join Edgware Road.  
 
Details of the proposal 
9 The application proposes the redevelopment of the site for mixed use 
development to provide 4,051sq.m. of flexible commercial floorspace (B1(a), (b) and (c), 
B8, D2 and A3) and 501 residential units including a mix of studio, 1, 2, 3 and 4-
bedroom units with associated basement car parking and cycle storage. 
10 The proposal seeks to make amendments to the extant planning permission 
referred to in paragraph 14 below, to provide additional floors on Blocks B, C, D and E 
and reconfigure the internal layout to several of the blocks.  
11 The additional floorspace would deliver a further 67 new residential units 
compared to the extant consent, comprising the following to each block: 
 
• Block B: one additional floor providing 12 flats  
• Block C: one additional floor providing 11 flats  
• Block D: one additional floor providing 14 flats 
• Block E: three additional floors providing 30 flats. 
 
12 The internal layout of blocks C, D, E and G would also be optimised to provide 
an additional 20 residential units. The revised proposal would result in the creation of 
87 new homes. It also reduces the number of car parking spaces. 
 
Case history 
13 A pre-application meeting was held on the 20 August 2019 and a pre-application 
report was issued on the 27 September 2019. The report supported the principle of 
development and increase in residential units, subject to the optimal provision of 
industrial floorspace, affordable housing and the achievement of good design. 
14 Planning permission was granted on this site in 2018 (LPA ref.17/0837, GLA 
reference GLA/3932/02) for the demolition of the existing buildings and redevelopment 
of the site to provide 6 buildings ranging between 4 to 9 storeys and 8 three storey 
mews houses and the erection of a 2 storey commercial building, providing a total of 
4,051sq.m. of flexible commercial floorspace (B1(a), (b) and (c), B8, D2 and A3) across 
the site and 414 residential units. 
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
15 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase 
Act 2004, the development plan in force for the area is Brent Local Plan (2010), and 
the London Plan 2016 (The Spatial Development Strategy for London Consolidated 
with Alterations since 2011). 
 
16 The following are relevant material considerations:  
 page 4 
• The National Planning Policy Framework and National Planning Practice 
Guidance. 
• The Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan (December 2019), which should be 
taken into account on the basis explained in the NPPF. 
• Affordable Housing and Viability Supplementary Planning Guidance, August 
2017. 
• Brent’s draft Local Plan 2018 Publication Stage. 
 
17 The relevant issues and corresponding policies are as follows:  
• Employment/Industry London Plan; 
• Housing London Plan; Housing SPG; Housing Strategy; 
Shaping Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal 
Recreation SPG;  
• Affordable housing London Plan; Affordable Housing & Viability SPG;    
• Urban design   London Plan; Character and Context SPG; 
• Inclusive access   London Plan; Accessible London SPG; 
• Sustainable development London Plan; Sustainable Design and Construction 
SPG; Mayor’s Environment Strategy; 
• Transport London Plan; the Mayor’s Transport Strategy. 
 
Principle of development 
 
18 The site is designated as a Locally Significant Industrial Site (LSIS). It has also 
been granted planning permission for 414 residential units and the provision of a total 
of 4,051sq.m. of flexible commercial floorspace (B1(a), (b) and (c), B8, D2 and A3). 
This permission is extant and capable of being implemented. 
 
Industrial land 
 
19 London Plan Policy 4.4 seeks to manage industrial land and premises. The 
Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan identifies a significant loss of industrial land to 
other uses between 2001 and 2015, well in excess of monitoring benchmarks in the 
current London Plan, and a positive net demand for industrial land is expected in the 
2016-2041 period. Brent is identified under Policy E4 of the Mayor’s intend to publish 
London Plan as a borough that is required to provide industrial capacity. The Mayor’s 
intend to publish London Plan Policy E4 states that the retention, enhancement and 
provision of additional industrial capacity on industrial land should be planned, 
monitored and managed to ensure that in overall terms across London there is no net 
loss of industrial floorspace capacity within designated SIL and LSIS. The Mayor’s 
intend to publish London Plan Policy E7 encourages the intensification and colocation 
of industrial land as part of a plan-led process of SIL or LSIS intensification and 
consolidation (and the areas affected clearly defined in Development Plan policies 
maps) or as part of a co-ordinated masterplanning process in collaboration with the 
GLA and relevant borough.  
 
20 Brent Council is currently reviewing its draft Local Plan, which includes a 
review of its Site Allocations. The site is part of Allocated Site BNSA1 Capitol Way 
Valley, which requires mixed use development comprising areas of employment 