 
 page 1 
  
planning report GLA/5140/01  
  1 July 2019 
Former Truman Brewery, Stour Road 
in the London Legacy Development Corporation 
planning application no. 19/00185/FUL  
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 2007; Town & 
Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Mixed use redevelopment comprising construction of a new building ranging in height from five to seven 
storeys to provide 1,908 sqm of commercial space (B1c) and yard, 330 student rooms provision of podium 
amenity space, along with public realm improvements. 
The applicant 
The applicant is Southern Grove Hackney Wick Limited, the architect is Henley Halebrown. 
Strategic issues 
Principle of development: The redevelopment of the site to provide student housing together with a net 
increase in industrial floorspace is supported subject to the applicant demonstrating that the introduction 
of student housing would not compromise the ongoing function of the industrial uses in and around the 
site and the student housing incorporates adequate mitigation against any adverse impacts.  A dedicated 
loading bay area for the industrial building must be provided.  The applicant is required to enter into a 
nominations agreement with a named Higher Education Provider.  (paragraphs 13- 29) 
Affordable student housing: The development proposes 35% affordable student housing.  Currently, 
the scheme would result in compromised industrial capacity whereby the Fast Track Route threshold would 
be 50%.  As such the application would be subject to the Viability Tested Route with both early and late 
stage review mechanisms secured within the s106 unless a suitably sized dedicated loading bay area is 
provided. (paragraphs 30 – 37)  
Transport: A contribution to public realm improvements and wayfinding will be required. A section 278 
agreement would need to be entered into to deal with changes to crossovers and footways.  The cycle 
parking should be designed to London Cycle Parking Design standards and the cycle parking provision for 
the student element increased to provide 330 long stay and 10 short stay spaces, as well as space for 
oversized bicycles as well as site access and servicing matters.  A plan should be prepared to manage 
the impact of students moving in and out. (paragraphs 49 – 56) 
Outstanding issues relating to urban design (paragraphs 39-38), inclusive design (paragraph 42), 
energy (paragraph 43), drainage (paragraphs 44-47) and urban greening (paragraph 48) would also 
need to be addressed. 
Recommendation 
That the LLDC be advised that the application does not yet comply with the London Plan, for the reasons 
set out in paragraph 60 of this report; but that the possible remedies set out in that paragraph could 
address these deficiencies. 
 
 
 page 2 
 
 
Context 
1 On 20 May 2019, the Mayor of London received documents from the LLDC notifying him 
of a planning application of potential strategic importance to develop the above site for the above 
uses.  Under the provisions of The Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008, the 
Mayor has to provide the LLDC with a statement setting out whether he considers that the 
application complies with the London plan and the reasons for taking that view.  The Mayor may 
also provide other comments.  This report sets out information for the Mayor’s use in deciding 
what decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under Categories 1A of the Schedule to the 2008 Order: 
• 1A – “Development which comprises or includes the provision of more than 150 houses, 
flats or houses and flats.” 
 
3 Once the LLDC has resolved to determine the application, it is required to refer it back to 
the Mayor for his decision as to whether to direct refusal; or allow the LLDC to determine it itself.   
4 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA website 
www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
5 The site is approximately 0.3 hectares in size and is located on Fish Island.  It is bounded by 
Stour Road to the south, industrial buildings to the east, Beachy Road to the north and Smeed 
Road to the west.  Half of the site is occupied by six single storey industrial buildings and the 
remainder of the site laid out as associated yard space and parking.  Access to the site is gained 
from Stour Road.   
6 The Fish Island and White Post Lane Conservation Area is located immediately adjacent and 
opposite from the development to the south of Stour Road. Although there are no listed buildings 
within the conservation area at present, a number of buildings in the vicinity of the site are 
identified as heritage assets in the LLDC’s conservation area appraisal including Broadwood’s piano 
factory to the east and the Wick Lane Rubber Works and Algha Works to the south of the site.   
7 The nearest bus stops are located 200 metres to the west of the site, served by three 
services. London Overground services are available from Hackney Wick station, located 800 metres 
to the north of the site. The closest Underground and National Rail station is Stratford regional, 
1.3 kilometres to the east of the site.  A Mayor’s Cycle Hire docking station is available 250 metres 
to the north east to the site. The site currently has been calculated to have a Public Transport 
Accessibility Level (PTAL) of 2, on a scale of 0 to 6b where 6b is the highest. 
Details of the proposal 
8 The proposals include the demolition of the existing buildings and construction of two new 
buildings ranging in height from five to seven storeys to provide 1,855 sq.m. GIA of commercial 
space (B1c) and yard, 330 student rooms (Use Class Sui Generis) provision of podium amenity 
space, along with public realm improvements. 
Case history 
9 No pre-application discussions were held with GLA officers prior to submission. 
 
 
 page 3 
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
10 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, the 
development plan in force for the area is the LLDC’s Local Plan (July 2015) and the London Plan 
(Consolidated with Alterations since 2011) (2016).  
11 The following are also relevant material considerations:  
• The National Planning Policy Framework and National Planning Practice Guidance. 
• The draft London Plan (2017) incorporating the Mayor's August 2018 Minor Suggested 
Changes which should be taken into account on the basis explained in the NPPF. 
• LLDC’s Publication draft Revised Local Plan (November 2018). 
• Hackney Wick and Fish Island SPD (March 2018). 
• Fish Island and White Post Lane Management Guidelines (March 2015) 
12 The relevant issues and corresponding policies are as follows:  
• Industrial land London Plan; Land for Industry and Transport SPG; Industrial 
Intensification Primer;  
• Student housing London Plan; Housing SPG; Housing Strategy; Affordable 
Housing and Viability SPG; 
• Urban design and heritage London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character and Context 
SPG;  
• Inclusive design London Plan; Accessible London: achieving an inclusive 
environment SPG 
• Energy and drainage London Plan; Sustainable Design and Construction SPG; 
Mayor’s Environment Strategy; 
• Transport London Plan; the Mayor’s Transport Strategy; Crossrail SPG. 
 
Principle of development 
 
Industrial use 
13 The existing site currently accommodates 1,420 sq.m. of mixed industrial floorspace 
(B1c/B2/B8) but does not form part of a Strategic Industrial Land (SIL) or Locally Significant 
Industrial Site (LSIS) designation.  In accordance with the Policy E4 of the draft London Plan, 
the site would therefore constitute Non-Designated Industrial Site (NDIS).  The draft London 
Plan Policy E4 seeks to maintain a sufficient supply of industrial land and premises for industrial 
and related functions across SIL, LSIS and NDIS with no overall net loss of industrial floorspace 
capacity.   
14 In this regard, the proposals seek the re-provision of 1,855 sq.m. (GIA)/2,165 sq.m. 
(GEA) of industrial floorspace (B1c) in a new 5 storey building and at the ground floor of the 
student housing block.   This represents a net increase in industrial floorspace over that currently 
provided on site, which is strongly supported in principle in line with Policy 4.4 of the London 
Plan and Policy E4 of the draft London Plan.   
 
 page 4 
15 However, whilst scheme would provide a net increase in the existing industrial floorspace 
on site and would also exceed the 65% plot ratio threshold, draft London Plan paragraph 
6.4.5AA also stipulates that, when applying the principle of no net loss of industrial floorspace 
capacity, regard should also be given to the characteristics and operational requirements of the 
different industrial uses.  Dedicated yard space is an essential requirement for most industrial, 
logistics and related uses to support servicing, storage and operational needs.  Development 
proposals should therefore ensure that sufficient yard space is provided having regard to the 
operational requirements of the uses proposed.   
16 In this regard, the proposed servicing and delivery provisions for the industrial building 
are not satisfactory and would need to be revised in order to support a typical light industrial 
occupier.  Servicing and deliveries are proposed to take place from the access road only.  No 
dedicated loading bay is proposed to be provided.  The access road is also the only means of 
access to the proposed disabled parking bays.  A dedicated loading bay of sufficient size must 
be accommodated within the development.  This is vital to the success of the industrial element 
of the scheme.   
17 Notwithstanding this, it is positive to note that the industrial building has been designed 
with reference to the Industrial Intensification and Co-location Study produced by We Made 
That.  The applicant has confirmed that the proposed industrial building would have a floor to 
ceiling height of 3.7m and a minimum floor to underside of down stand beams and services 
height of 3.3m. A generous goods lift would also be provided. 
18 The applicant is assisting in the relocation of the remaining tenants on site, which is 
welcomed.  
19 Given that the proposals would involve the co-location of industrial uses with student 
housing, the provisions of draft London Plan Policies E7 and D12 would apply in the same way 
as C3 residential.  As such, the applicant would need to demonstrate that the industrial and 
related activities on site or in the surroundings are not compromised in terms of their continued 
efficient function, access, service arrangements, and days/ hours of operation noting that many 
businesses have 7-day / 24 hour access and operational requirements; and the intensified 
industrial is completed in advance of the student housing being occupied.  
20 Further detail is required to demonstrate how the scheme has employed appropriate 
design mitigation within the student housing element to ensure compliance with the above, with 
particular consideration given to safety and security, the layout, orientation, access, and delivery 
arrangements of the uses in order to minimise conflict; design quality, public realm, visual impact 
and amenity for residents; agent of change principles; vibration and noise; and air quality 
including dust, odour and emissions.   
Student housing 
21 London Plan Policy 3.8 relating to housing choice, seeks to ensure that requirements for 
student housing meeting a demonstrable need are addressed by working closely with 
stakeholders in higher and further education and without compromising capacity for 
conventional homes.  Policy relating to student accommodation has been further developed 
within the draft London Plan.  Draft Policy H17 (Part A) seeks to ensure that local and strategic 
need for purpose-built student accommodation is addressed, provided that: at the 
neighbourhood level, the development contributes to a mixed and inclusive neighbourhood; the 
use of the accommodation is secured for students; the accommodation is secured through a 
nomination agreement for occupation by students of one or more higher education provider; the 
maximum level of accommodation is secured as affordable student accommodation as defined 