 page 1 
   
planning report GLA/4697/01  
24 February 2020 
 2A, part of Westend Saab and Boyriven Textile 
Bridgewater Road   
In the London Borough of Brent  
planning application no. 19/4541 
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral  
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 
and 2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Demolition of the existing buildings and structures, the erection of a 'co-location' scheme 
ranging in height from 3 to 19 storeys, incorporating industrial floorspace with 124 
residential units, together with associated landscaping, vehicular access arrangements, 
car and cycle parking, servicing and refuse and recycling facilities. 
The applicant 
The applicant is Peabody and the architect is Barton Willmore LLP. 
Strategic issues summary 
Principle of development: In view of the masterplan approach adopted by the applicant 
and emerging plan-led approach by the Council, the residential-led mixed use scheme on 
this LSIS is acceptable in strategic planning terms (paragraphs 13-16). 
Affordable housing: 100% affordable housing (with a tenure mix of 38% affordable rent 
and 62% shared ownership); this is strongly supported and would qualify for the Fast Track 
Route, subject to the Council’s approval of the tenure mix (paragraphs 20-24). 
Urban design: The residential quality is generally high and the layout, height and massing 
responds well to the existing and emerging context (paragraphs 25-32). 
Environment: Further information is required in relation to the district centre connection, 
overheating and ground source heat pumps. Additional PV cells should be considered 
(paragraphs 33-36). 
Transport: Clarification on the trip generation for public transport is required to determine 
the development’s impacts. Details of cycle parking and various transport-related plans 
should be secured via the S106 (paragraphs 37-42).  
Recommendation 
That Brent Council be advised that whilst the principle of development is supported the 
application does not yet fully comply with the London Plan and Mayor’s intend to publish 
London Plan for the reasons set out in paragraph 46 of this report. However, the resolution 
of these issues could lead to the application becoming fully compliant with the London Plan 
and Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan. 

 page 2 
Context 
1 On 13 January 2020, the Mayor of London received documents from Brent 
Council notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance to 
develop the above site for the above uses. Under the provisions of The Town & Country 
Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 the Mayor must provide the Council with a 
statement setting out whether he considers that the application complies with the 
London Plan and draft London Plan, and his reasons for taking that view. The Mayor 
may also provide other comments. This report sets out information for the Mayor’s use 
in deciding what decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under Category 1C of the Mayor of London Order 
2008: 
• Category 1C: “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a 
building of (c) more than 30 metres high and is outside the City of London.” 
3 Once Brent Council has resolved to determine the application, it is required to 
refer it back to the Mayor for his decision as to whether to direct refusal, call the 
application in for his own determination or allow the Council to determine it itself. 
4 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA 
website www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
5 The 0.35-hecatre application site falls within a Housing Zone. It is occupied by a 
single-storey, vacant car showroom situated on the north-eastern side of Bridgewater 
Road, opposite the intersection with Manor Farm Road, an area of vacant land to the 
rear of the showroom (formerly the Boyriven Textiles building) and part of a single-
storey workshop building to the rear of the adjacent hand car wash. 
6 The site is bounded to the south by Bridgewater Road and the Piccadilly 
Underground line tracks run directly north of the site. An electricity substation is 
immediately to the southeast and industrial buildings to the northwest. The wider 
surrounding area is mixed in character, comprising traditional residential areas to the 
west, the Recreation Ground and Alperton School to the north, Alperton Bus Garage to 
the southeast and commercial and industrial buildings to the south, with large-scale 
redevelopment occurring in Alperton Growth Area further to the southeast. The site is 
not within a conservation area nor are the buildings occupying the site listed. 
7 The nearest part of the Transport for London Road Network (TLRN) is A406 
North Circular Road, approximately 1.15 kilometres to the northeast. The nearest part of 
the Strategic Road Network (SRN) is A404 High Road/ A4089 Ealing Road junction, 
approximately 1.6 kilometres to the north of the site. The nearest rail station is Alperton, 
approximately 270 metres to the east of the site, offering LU Piccadilly Line services. 
The site is served by 7 bus routes, with the nearest stops located on Bridgewater Road. 
Additional bus stops are located on Ealing Road. Consequently, the site has a good 
public transport access level (PTAL) of 4, on a scale of 0 to 6b, where 6b is the best. 
 
 page 3 
Details of the proposal 
8 Peabody, a registered social housing provider and GLA Strategic Partner, 
proposes to demolish the existing buildings and redevelop the site to provide a 
residential-led mixed use development, involving the erection of three blocks ranging in 
height from 3 to 18 floors and comprising: 124 new residential units; 1,879 sq.m. of B1c 
floorspace; and, 9 Blue Badge parking spaces. 
Case history 
9 GLA officers provided initial pre-application advice on this scheme on 18 October 
2019 covering strategic issues with respect to: principle of development, urban design, 
housing, affordable housing, inclusive access and sustainable development/climate 
change. The pre-application advice note issued by the GLA strongly supported the 
principle of development, subject to the applicant demonstrating that opportunities for 
the reprovision of industrial capacity on site have been maximised. Any future planning 
application also needed to address issues raised in the report in relation to affordable 
housing, urban and inclusive design, environment and transportation. 
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
10 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004, the development plan in force for the area is Brent Council’s 2010 Core Strategy 
Development Plan Document (DPD); the 2011 Site Specific Allocation Development 
Plan Document; the 2016 Development Management Policies; and, the London Plan 
2016 (The Spatial Development Strategy for London Consolidated with Alterations since 
2011).   
11 The relevant issues and corresponding policies are as follows: 
• Land use London Plan; 
• Employment land London Plan; Land for Industry and Transport SPG; 
• Housing/Affordable London Plan; Housing SPG; Housing Strategy; Shaping 
      housing Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal Recreation SPG; 
Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character and Context SPG; 
Affordable Housing and Viability SPG; 
• Urban design London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character      
and Context SPG; Housing SPG; Shaping 
Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal Recreation SPG; 
• Inclusive design London Plan; Accessible London: Achieving an Inclusive 
Environment SPG; 
• Environment London Plan; Sustainable Design and Construction SPG; 
Mayor’s Environment Strategy; 
• Transport London Plan; Mayor’s Transport Strategy. 
  
 page 4 
12 The following are relevant material considerations: 
• the National Planning Policy Framework and National Planning Practice 
Guidance; 
• The London Plan – Intend to publish version (December 2019), which 
should be taken into account on the basis explained in the NPPF; and, 
• Brent Council Draft Preferred Options Local Plan (2018). 
Principle of development 
13 The site is designated as a Locally Significant Industrial Site (LSIS). London Plan 
Policy 4.4 and draft London Plan Policy E4 of the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan 
require all boroughs to effectively manage industrial land to ensure enough stock of land 
and premises are available to meet current and future needs in various parts of London. 
Policy E4 further sets out that any release of industrial land should facilitate industrial 
intensification, co-location and land substitution processes and makes clear that any 
release that accords with this approach should be in locations that have high public 
transport accessibility and aid in delivering other planning priorities, particularly 
affordable housing. The approach in relation to LSIS is reflected in Policy E6 and Policy 
E7 of the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan. Policy E7 re-emphasises the need for 
a plan or masterplan-led approach to intensification and co-location on industrial sites.  
14 In response to updated strategic evidence on the supply and demand for 
industrial land, Policies E4 and E7 of the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan 
propose a revised strategic planning policy framework for designated industrial land in 
London. This approach seeks to ensure there is no overall net loss in industrial 
floorspace capacity (and yard space capacity) within designated SIL and LSIS areas. 
15 Policies E6 and E7 recognise that there may be potential within LSIS for 
industrial intensification and co-location with residential and other land uses, subject to 
compliance with the criteria set out in Policy E7. This includes securing no overall net 
loss of industrial floorspace (and yard space capacity) and ensuring adjacent industrial 
activities are not compromised and appropriate design mitigation measures are secured 
in line with the Agent of Change principle set out in Policy D13 of the Mayor’s intend to 
publish London Plan. Furthermore, it is noted that Brent has been reclassified as a 
‘provide capacity’ borough in Table 6.2 of the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan. 
Given this categorisation, the Council has started the process of a plan-led approach 
with the publication of the draft Preferred Options Local Plan, which identifies sites 
within the Alperton area (including the application site under Site Allocation BWSA1 – 
Alperton Industrial Sites) for industrial intensification/co-location. Additionally, in line with 
the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan requirement for a masterplan-led approach to 
intensification and co-location on industrial sites, the applicant commissioned a 
masterplan that considered the sites in Site Allocation BSWSA1. This has been 
discussed with GLA planning officers and though not adopted, satisfactorily 
demonstrates the feasibility of developing the sites contained within the allocation. 
16 In view of the masterplan-led approach employed by the applicant and the 
Council’s emerging plan-led strategy of intensifying industrial capacity on LSIS, 
including the application site, the principle of development is considered acceptable in 
line with London Plan Policy 4.4 and Policies E4, E6 and E7 and objective GG2 of the 
Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan. 