 page 1 
 
  planning report D&P/3813/01  
  30 November 2015 
1 Vince Street, London, EC1V 9HB 
in the London Borough of Hackney  
planning application no. 2015/3377  
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 2007; 
Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Demolition of existing public house (Use Class A4) and erection of a 10 storey mixed use 
development comprising retail (Use Class A1/A3) at basement and ground floor levels with 17 
residential units above, each with external amenity space. 
The applicant 
The applicant is Max Barney (EC2) Ltd and the architect is Kyson. 
Strategic issues 
The principle of the mixed-use redevelopment of this site is supported. However, there are a 
number of outstanding strategic planning concerns relating to social infrastructure, affordable 
housing, urban design, inclusive design, climate change and transport. 
Recommendation 
That Hackney Council be advised that, whilst the principle of the proposal is supported, the 
application does not comply with the London Plan, for the reasons set out in paragraph 43 of this 
report; but that the possible remedies also set out in this paragraph could address these 
deficiencies. 
 
Context 
1 On 19 October 2015 the Mayor of London received documents from Hackney Council 
notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance to develop the above site 
for the above uses.  Under the provisions of The Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) 
Order 2008 the Mayor must provide the Council with a statement setting out whether he considers 
that the application complies with the London Plan, and his reasons for taking that view.  The 
Mayor may also provide other comments.  This report sets out information for the Mayor’s use in 
deciding what decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under the following Categories of the Schedule to the 2008 
Order:  
 Category 1C: “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a building more 
than thirty metres high and outside the City of London”. 
 

 page 2 
3 Once Hackney Council has resolved to determine the application, it is required to refer it 
back to the Mayor for his decision as to whether to direct refusal; take it over for his own 
determination; or allow the Council to determine it itself. 
4 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA website 
www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
5 The application site comprises a two storey public house, bound to the east by Vince Street 
and to the south by Old Street, with a site area of 0.02 hectares.  To the east is Shoreditch Fire 
Station, to the north is a housing estate and to the west is a low rise retail parade.  The south side 
of Old Street generally comprises a mixture of larger commercial buildings. 
6 Old Street Station (London Underground and National Rail) is approximately 60 metres 
away and Shoreditch High Street (London Overground) is 800 metres away.  The site is served by 
17 bus services, the nearest stop being immediately adjacent on Old Street.  The site has a public 
transport accessibility level of 6b, on a scale where 1 is the lowest and 6 is the highest.  In addition, 
the site is located within 150 metres of the Cycle Superhighway 1 route, currently under 
construction.  The site is served by the Mayor’s Cycle Hire Scheme, with five docking stations 
within 500 metres of the site.  The nearest section of the Transport for London Road Network 
(TLRN) is Old Street. 
7 The site is within the City Fringe Opportunity Area and Central Activities Zone. The South 
Shoreditch Conservation Area boundary falls to the east beyond the fire station.   
Details of the proposal 
8 The proposal is for a mixed use development as described above.  In summary, it would 
comprise the demolition of the existing public house and the construction of a 10 storey building 
with 213 sq.m. of Use Class A1/A3 space and 17 flats. 
9 The proposed residential mix would comprise 6 x 1 bed, 6 x 2 bed and 5 x 3 bed flats, each 
having private balconies.  Cycle storage for the retail would be located at ground floor level, with 
the residential in the basement, along with plant and bin storage.   
Case history 
10 There is no relevant GLA case history, but it is noted that Hackney Council have previously 
approved an 8 storey building comprising 402 sq.m. of office space and 136 sq.m. of retail on the 
site.  This was granted in August 2014. 
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
11 The relevant issues and corresponding policies are as follows: 
 Mix of uses London Plan; Social Infrastructure SPD; City Fringe Opportunity 
Area Planning Framework; draft Central Activities Zone SPG 
 Housing London Plan; Housing SPG; draft Interim Housing SPG; Housing 
Strategy; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal Recreation 
SPG; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character and Context, SPG 
 Affordable housing London Plan; draft Interim Housing SPG; Housing Strategy;  
 Urban design London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character and Context, 
SPG; draft Interim Housing SPG; 
 page 3 
 Inclusive design London Plan; Accessible London: achieving an inclusive 
environment SPG 
 Climate change London Plan; Sustainable Design and Construction SPG; Mayor’s 
Climate Change Adaptation Strategy; Mayor’s Climate Change 
Mitigation and Energy Strategy; Mayor’s Water Strategy  
 Transport London Plan; the Mayor’s Transport Strategy; Land for Industry 
and Transport SPG 
 Crossrail London Plan; Mayoral Community Infrastructure Levy; Crossrail 
SPG 
 
12 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, the 
development plan in force for the area is the Hackney Core Strategy (December 2010) and 
Development Management Policies (July 2015), as well as the London Plan (Consolidated with 
Alterations since 2011).  The draft Minor Alterations to the London Plan (2015) and the National 
Planning Policy Framework and Technical Guide to the National Planning Policy Framework, are 
also relevant material considerations.  In addition, the City Fringe Opportunity Area Planning 
Framework is material to the consideration of this application. 
Principle of mixed use development 
 
13 The proposal for residential development over ground floor non-residential floorspace in 
this location does not raise any strategic concerns.  However, the proposal would result in the loss 
of a public house without a similar replacement use, or alternative social infrastructure provision.  It 
is noted that Hackney Development Management Policy DM5, adopted since the previous approval 
on the site, seeks to protect social and community facilities, including public houses.  In accordance 
with this policy, either a replacement facility should be provided as part of the redevelopment 
scheme or the applicant should demonstrate that the community facility is no longer required and 
that there is no demand for alternative community uses on the site.  Furthermore, the City Fringe 
Opportunity Area Planning Framework recognises the community asset value of public houses and 
their contribution to the evening economy.  The application contains limited justification for the 
loss of a public house and the applicant is requested to either amend the proposal to include a 
replacement public house or alternative community facility if appropriate, or alternatively provide a 
full justification for its loss in order to ensure that the proposal complies with London Plan Policy 
3.16. 
 
Housing 
Proposed residential mix 
14 The application proposes 17 residential units in total, with the mix set out in T able 2, below. 
This raise no strategic concerns, but the Council should confirm that the proposed housing mix 
meets local requirements. 
unit type number % of total scheme 
1 bed 6 35 
2 bed 6 35 
3 bed 5 30 
total 17 100.0 
Table 2: proposed unit mix 
 
 
 page 4 
Affordable housing 
15 London Plan Policy 3.12 requires councils to seek the maximum reasonable amount of 
affordable housing when negotiating on individual private residential and mixed-use schemes. 
The proposal does not include any on site affordable housing. The applicant has submitted a 
financial viability report in support of its proposals, which is being independently assessed by the 
Council.  The application documents state that there would be a surplus of £360,000, but 
instead proposes that this be paid as a financial contribution towards off site provision.  It is not 
possible at this stage to determine whether the application provides the maximum reasonable 
amount of affordable housing in accordance with London Plan Policy 3.12.  The Council should 
confirm that this surplus is the maximum reasonable contribution and that it is content to accept 
off site provision in this case. 
Density 
16 London Plan Policy 3.4 requires development to optimise housing output for different 
locations taking into account local context and character, design principles set out in the London 
Plan and public transport capacity.  London Plan Table 3.2 provides the density matrix in support of 
this policy. The site is regarded as having a ‘central’ setting with a high public transport accessibility 
level. The London Plan indicative residential density for this site is 650-1,100 habitable rooms per 
hectare. 
17 The proposed development would have a density of 2,833 habitable rooms per hectare and 
this has been calculated based on the net residential site area.  The density would be significantly 
above the indicative ranges, although given the highly accessible and central nature of the site, a 
high density scheme would not necessarily be a concern.  It is noted that the Mayor’s 
supplementary planning guidance ‘Housing’ makes it clear that high density proposals need to be 
of the highest design quality, amenity and contribute to local place making.  These matters are 
addressed in the following sections. 
Housing quality 
18 London Plan Policy 3.5 promotes quality in new housing provision, with further guidance 
provided by the Mayor’s Housing SPG. All of the units meet the Mayor’s minimum space standards 
for internal space and amenity space, which is welcomed.  All the units are triple aspect, floor to 
ceiling heights would exceed 2.5 metres and the scheme achieves an efficient core to unit ratio, 
with only two units on each floor.  The quality of the residential units is therefore generally high, 
although the internal corridor widths are significantly below the 1.5 metres required by the Mayor’s 
Housing SPG.  The applicant should therefore revise the layout to ensure adequate corridor widths.   
Children’s play space provision 
19 London Plan Policy 3.6 seeks to ensure that development proposals include suitable 
provision for play and recreation. Further detail is provided in the Mayor’s supplementary planning 
guidance ‘Providing for Children and Young People’s Play and Informal Recreation’, including a 
benchmark of 10 sq.m. of usable space to be provided per child, with under-5 child playspace 
provided on-site.  However, the child yield of the development would be well below the threshold 
set out in the SPG for on-site provision, so the scheme would not be expected to provide any play 
space.    
Urban design 
20 Good design is central to all objectives of the London Plan, and given the density of the 
development, its design needs to be of an outstanding quality.  The proposed scheme would be 
an improved compared to the approved building, and whilst the scheme is strongly commended, 
there remain outstanding concerns that need to be addressed. 