                         Development, Enterprise and Environment  
 
 
  
Direct telephone: 020 7983 4000 Email: planningsupport@london.gov.uk 
 
 
 
 
Dear Ms. Taylor 
 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London 
Authority Act 1999 & 2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of 
London) Order 2008.  
 
2A, part of Westend Saab and Boyriven Textile, Bridgewater Road, 
London Borough of Brent 
Local planning authority reference: 19/4541 
 
I refer to the copy of the above planning application, which was received from you on 13 
January 2020. On 24 February 2020, the Mayor considered a report on this proposal, 
reference GLA/4697/01. A copy of the report is attached, in full. This letter comprises 
the statement that the Mayor is required to provide under Article 4(2) of the Order. 
The Mayor considers that the application does not comply with the London Plan and the 
Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan, for the reasons set out in paragraph 46 of the 
above-mentioned report; but that the possible remedies set out in that paragraph of this 
report could address these deficiencies.  
If your Council subsequently resolves to make a draft decision on the application, it must 
consult the Mayor again under Article 5 of the Order and allow him fourteen days to 
decide whether to allow the draft decision to proceed unchanged, or direct the Council 
under Article 6 to refuse the application, or issue a direction under Article 7 that he is to 
act as the local planning authority for the purpose of determining the application. You 
should therefore send me a copy of any representations made in respect of the 
application, and a copy of any officer’s report, together with a statement of the decision 
your authority proposes to make, and (if it proposed to grant permission) a statement of 
any conditions the authority proposes to impose and a draft of any planning obligation it 
proposes to enter into and details of any proposed planning contribution.  
 
June Taylor 
Principal Planning Officer (North Area Team) 
Planning & Regeneration 
Brent Council 
Brent Civic Centre, Engineers Way 
Wembley HA9 0FJ 
 
 
 
Department: Planning 
Our ref:  GLA4697/AP01 
Your ref: 19/4541 
Date: 24 February 2020 
 
 
 
- 2 - 
 
Please note that the Transport for London case officer for this application is Juan 
Sanclemente, v_JuanSanclemente@tfl.gov.uk. 
Yours sincerely 
 
 
John Finlayson 
Head of Development Management, Planning 
 
 
cc Navin Shah, London Assembly Constituency Member 
 Andrew Boff, Chair of London Assembly Planning Committee 
  National Planning Casework Unit, DCLG 
 Lucinda Turner, TfL 
 Eve Ladden Timbers, Barton Willmore, Soho Square, London W1D 3QB 