 
  planning report GLA/4709/01  
   10 February 2020 
Car Park Site, Naval Row, Poplar 
in the London Borough of Tower Hamlets  
planning application no. PA/19/02292/A1 
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 
2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 
The proposal 
342-room, part-24 part-17 storey, apart-hotel (C1 Use Class), eight workspace units (B1 Use 
Class), new bus loop/stand, new youth play area, and public realm works  
The applicant 
The applicants are Criterion Capital, and the architects are Collado Collins Architects 
Strategic issues 
Principle of development: The principle of a 342 bedroom apart-hotel within an opportunity 
area is supported by strategic planning policy. Further engagement with neighbouring 
stakeholders is required to demonstrate that the proposal would not compromise the delivery of 
residential units or floorspace within the consented Blackwall Reach masterplan. (Paragraphs 
17-25) 
Urban design: The design responds well to the local context and proposes a high-quality 
redevelopment. The proposal would not harm the significance of nearby heritage assets. 
(Paragraphs 26-41) 
Sustainable development: The Energy Hierarchy has been followed as required in London 
Plan policy 5.2 and policy SI3 of the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan. The applicant 
should provide further detail on the proposed ASHP and PV provision and connection to nearby 
heat networks. (Paragraphs 42-45) 
Transport: A suitable mechanism is required to ensure the bus stand is adequately re-
provided across all phases. Access to DLR infrastructure and the safe and efficient operation of 
the railway must be maintained. An additional short-stay cycle space for the apart-hotel is 
required and cycle parking for the commercial units should be provided. Healthy Streets 
improvements should be secured in support of this application. (Paragraphs 46-66) 
Recommendation 
That Tower Hamlets Council be advised that while the scheme is generally supported in 
strategic planning terms, the application does not fully comply with the London Plan, for the 
reasons set out in paragraph 70 of this report.  
 
 
Context 
1 On 13 November 2019 the Mayor of London received documents from Tower 
Hamlets Council notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance 
to develop the above site for the above uses. Under the provisions of The Town & 
Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 the Mayor must provide the Council 
with a statement setting out whether he considers that the application complies with the 
London Plan, and his reasons for taking that view. The Mayor may also provide other 
comments.  This report sets out information for the Mayor’s use in deciding what 
decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under the following Categories of the Schedule to the 
Order 2008: 
• 1B ‘Development (other than development which only comprises the provision of 
houses, flats or houses and flats) which comprises or includes the erection of a 
building or buildings outside Central London and with a total floorspace of more 
than 15,000 square metres 
 
• 1C.1(c) “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a building 
more than 30 metres high and is outside the City of London.”  
 
3 Once Tower Hamlets Council has resolved to determine the application, it is 
required to refer it back to the Mayor for his decision as to whether to direct refusal; take 
it over for his own determination; or allow the Council to determine it itself. 
4 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA 
website www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
5 The site is a 0.72 hectare block of land accessed off Scouler Street, which is off 
Naval Row in the London Borough of Tower Hamlets. The site sits directly to the north 
of Aspen Way. The DLR concrete viaduct runs directly above the southern portion of the 
site running east-west. Scouler Street bounds the site to the north and Prestage Way to 
the west.  
6 The A13 East India Dock Road is 350 metres to the north of the site, the A12 / 
A102 Blackwall Tunnel Approach Road is 150 metres to the north of the site, the 
tunnel itself runs north – south under the centre of the site. The A1261, A13 and 
A12/A102 all form part of the Transport for London Road Network (TLRN).   
 
7 Blackwall and East India Dock Road Docklands Light Railway (DLR) stations 
are located approximately 100 metres south west and 300 metres east of the site 
respectively. Both serve the Bank to Woolwich Arsenal and Tower Gateway to 
Beckton branches. 
 
8 Stops and stands for the bus route 15 are located directly to the west of the 
site on Ditchburn Street, adjacent to Blackwall DLR station. Further bus routes (D6, 
D7, D8, 108 and 115) are also accessible within walking distance (640 metres) of the 
site. Hence, the site records a PTAL (public transport access level) of 4 on scale of 0 
to 6b, where 6b is highest. 
 
 
9 Cycle Superhighway 3 (Barking to Tower Gateway) runs directly to the north of 
the site along Naval Row and the nearest Santander Cycle Hire docking station is 
approximately 150 metres north of the site at the junction of Prestage Way and 
Poplar High Street.  
 
10 The site is located in the Lower Lea Valley Opportunity Area and the Isle of Dogs 
and South Poplar Opportunity Area.  
11 The site falls within the boundary of the Blackwall Reach Masterplan, which is 
subject to outline planning permission for a major residential-led mixed use 
development in the wider site, bounded by East India Dock Road, Cotton Street, 
Aspen Way, Quidley Street and Robin Hood Lane, comprising up to 1,575 new 
homes, and up to 2,610 sq.m of commercial floorspace (LPA ref: PA/12/00001 & GLA 
ref:2727). The site is within the land identified for Phase 4 of the granted outline 
permission.  The Blackwall Reach outline permission has been implemented with 
phase 2 currently under construction. 
 
Details of the proposal 
12 The scheme proposes redevelopment of the site to provide a 342 bedroom apart 
hotel in a part-24 part-17 storey building, together with 8 commercial units within 
containers, public realm improvement works, creation of a new bus loop/stand and 
youth play area. The main building would include guest facilities at ground and 
mezzanine levels, reception, function rooms, communal workspace, exhibition space 
and café facilities. Bedrooms are located on the first– 23rd floor. 
Case history 
13 A series of pre-planning application meetings have been held between the 
applicant, Tower Hamlets Council and the Greater London Authority on the above 
proposal at the above site. An initial meeting was held with the GLA on 26 July 2018, 
with a follow up meeting held on 28 May 2019. GLA officers concluded that the 
development of the site independent of the Blackwall Reach outline masterplan could 
be supported subject to a collaborative position with neighbouring landowners and 
stakeholders. Given the above, it was advised that a sequential test and town centre 
impact assessment should be undertaken. Further information was required relating to 
the hotel use, urban design, and transport, prior to the submission of any application. 
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
14 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase 
Act 2004, the development plan in force for the area is the Tower Hamlets Local Plan 
2031: Managing Growth and Sharing Benefits and the 2016 London Plan 
(Consolidated with Alterations since 2011). 
 
15 The following are relevant material considerations:   
•  The revised National Planning Policy Framework;  
• National Planning Practice Guidance; and 
• The London Plan intend to publish version (December 2019). 
 
• Lower Lea Valley Opportunity Area Planning Framework (July 2007) 
• Isle of Dogs and South Poplar Opportunity Area Planning Framework (October 
2019) 
 
16 The relevant strategic issues and corresponding policies are as follows:  
• Opportunity Areas London Plan; 
• Visitor Accommodation London Plan; 
• Urban design   London Plan; Character and Context SPG; 
• Inclusive access   London Plan; Accessible London SPG; 
• Sustainable development London Plan; Sustainable Design and Construction 
SPG; Mayor’s Environment Strategy; 
• Transport London Plan; the Mayor’s Transport Strategy. 
 
Principle of development 
Visitor Accommodation 
17 London Plan Policy 4.5 ‘London’s Visitor Infrastructure’ seeks to achieve a target 
of 40,000 net additional hotel rooms by 2036, and where located beyond the Central 
Activities Zone, should be located in town centres and Opportunity Areas with good 
public transport access.  Policy E10 of the Intend to Publish London Plan also supports 
such accommodation, and paragraph 6.10.2 identifies that London will need to build an 
additional 58,000 bedrooms of serviced accommodation by 2041. 
18 The site is located within the Isle of Dogs and South Poplar Opportunity Area and 
Lower Lea Valley Opportunity Area and benefits from excellent public transport 
accessibility. As such, this is an appropriate location for visitor accommodation. The 
additional rooms would make a positive contribution towards the requirements of 
London Plan Policy 4.5 and Policy E10 of the intend to publish London Plan, and on this 
basis the proposal to redevelop the site to provide a 342 bed apart-hotel is supported in 
principle. 
Commercial uses 
19 London Plan Policy 4.2 ‘Offices’, and Policy E1 of the Intend to Publish London 
Plan support increases in the stock of offices of different sizes where there is 
evidence of demand. The proposal seeks to introduce new workspaces within 8 
containers on the southern edge of the site. The Isle of Dogs and South Poplar 
Opportunity Area Planning Framework identifies the site within the Poplar High Street 
neighbourhood centre, where the development of workspace for SME and start-up 
businesses is strongly supported. Accordingly, the principle of a new additional 
commercial workspace as part of the redevelopment of the site is supported. 
 
Relationship with Blackwall Reach Masterplan 
 
20   As noted above, the site is within the boundary of the extant permission for the 
wider Blackwall Reach Masterplan area. The applicant seeks to bring the proposed 
development forward independently of the Blackwall Reach outline permission.  