

 
 page 1 
  planning report GLA/4979a/01  
  5 August 2019 
Eastman Dental Hospital, 256 Grays Inn Road  
in the London Borough of Camden 
planning application no. 2019/2879/P  
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 2007; Town & 
Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Partial redevelopment, extension and erection a five-storey building to provide a dementia and neurology 
research facility, alteration of Grade II listed building, erection of part four/part seven storey building to 
provide education space. 
The applicant 
The applicant is University College London, the architect is Hawkins/Brown 
Strategic issues 
Principle: The principle of the increase of social infrastructure and community floor space, namely for uses 
by healthcare and education activities, is strongly supported in line with Central Activities Zone policies 
(para’s 17-22).  
Design: The form, massing and height of the proposal are supported as it successfully responds to the 
context and character of the site. Further consideration should be given to the architectural treatment of 
the southern elevation of Plot 3, as viewed by St Andrews Gardens. The proposed development does not 
impact the Viewing Corridor from Parliament Hill summit to St Paul’s (para’s 23-29).  
Heritage: The proposed development, including movement of a listed fountain, alterations of a listed 
building and alteration and partial demolition of an undesignated heritage asset, would cause less than 
substantial harm to the listed building and its setting, the listed structure and the conservation area. The 
scheme will deliver social, educational, community and economic public benefits including through the 
provision of an expanded and modernised facility for both UCL’s Institute of Neurology and the UK 
Dementia Research Institute Hub.  The public benefits outweigh the less than substantial harm and the 
scheme accords with heritage policies (para’s 30 - 37). 
Transport: Trip generation and mode share should be revised to consider the national catchment and 
specialist function of the proposal. Further engagement with TfL and LB Camden regarding the relocation 
of the bus stop is required. Financial contributions to mitigate the transport impacts of the development 
are required for bus capacity. Subject to the revised trip generation, further contributions towards public 
transport capacity and accessibility may be requested (para’s 49 -62).  
Outstanding issues relating to energy, urban greening and sustainable drainage need to be addressed. 
Recommendation 
That the London Borough of Camden be advised that the application does not yet comply with the London 
Plan, for the reasons set out in paragraph 66 of this report; but that the possible remedies set out in that 
paragraph could address these deficiencies. 
  
 
 
 page 2 
Context 
1 On 1st of July 2019, the Mayor of London received documents from Camden Council 
notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance to develop the above site 
for the above uses.  Under the provisions of The Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) 
Order 2008, the Mayor has to provide the Council with a statement setting out whether he 
considers that the application complies with the London plan and the reasons for taking that view.  
The Mayor may also provide other comments.  This report sets out information for the Mayor’s use 
in deciding what decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under Categories 1B and 1C of the Schedule to the 2008 Order: 
• Category 1B: “ Development (other than development which only comprises the provision 
of houses, flats, or houses and flats) which comprises or includes the erection of a building 
or buildings - outside Central London and with a total floorspace of more than 15,000 
square metres.” 
• Category 1C: “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a building of (c) 
more than 30 metres high and is outside the City of London.” 
 
3 Once the London Borough of Camden has resolved to determine the application, it is 
required to refer it back to the Mayor for his decision as to whether to direct refusal; take it over 
for his own determination; or allow the Council to determine it itself.   
4 The environmental information for the purposes of the Town and Country Planning 
(Environmental Impact Assessment) Regulations 2017 (as amended in 2018) has been taken into 
account in the consideration of this case. 
5 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA website 
www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
6 The site, which comprises 1.207 hectares, is located on the east side of Gray’s Inn Road, 
to the north of the junction with Guilford Street. The site is bounded to the south by St Andrews 
Gardens and to the north by Calthorpe Community Gardens.  
 
7 The site is broadly comprised of the four separate plots: the Eastman Dental Clinic, the 
Former Royal Free Hospital, the Levy Wing and the Frances Gardner House.  
 
8 The Eastman Dental Clinic is a Grade II listed brown brick building which fronts Grays Inn 
Road is located at the south-west of the site area. Immediately to the north of the Eastman 
Dental Clinic, are the buildings of the former Royal Free Hospital, which comprise four wings set 
around a central courtyard within which is located the Grade II listed Riddell Memorial Fountain. 
At the centre of the application site is the Levy Wing, a three-storey brick building set over three 
wings and to the east of the site is the Frances Gardner House. These buildings, except for 
Frances Gardener House which is used as student accommodation, are in use as the Eastman 
Dental Hospital. The Eastman Dental is due to vacate the site in 2019 and relocate to a new 
development at Huntley Street in Bloomsbury. 
 
9  The Eastman Dental Clinic and the former Royal Free Hospital buildings are located 
within the Bloomsbury Conservation Area (sub area 14), as is St Andrew’s Gardens to the south 
of the site (outside site boundary) and the Calthorpe Project Community Gardens to the north of 
the site (outside site boundary). The Levy Wing and Frances Gardner House, to the east of the 
application site, are not listed and are not located within the Bloomsbury Conservation Area. To 