 page 1 
                                                                                                                                       
                                                                           planning report GLA/5368/01 
30 January 2020 
Greenwich Park, Blackheath Avenue   
in the Royal Borough of Greenwich  
planning application no.19/3497/F 
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 
and 2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Temporary use and associated works to create a Fan Zone for the screening of football 
matches and hosting community events during the Euro 2020 Tournament. 
The applicant 
The applicant is the Greater London Authority (Events for London – Euro 2020 Fan 
Zone), and the architect is Loudsound Limited. 
Strategic issues summary: 
Principle of development: Installation of temporary structures for outdoor sports and 
recreation use for a temporary period on Metropolitan Open Land is appropriate 
development and acceptable, providing the facilities preserve openness and do not conflict 
with the purposes of including land within it. Mitigation measures must be secured to 
ensure that the land is returned to its existing or better condition (paragraphs 15 to 20).  
Community use: The wider community benefits, the intended level of access and fee 
discounts should be secured by way of condition / s106 planning agreement (paragraphs 
21 and 22). 
Heritage: The proposal would result in less than substantial harm to listed buildings, the 
World Heritage Site and the Conservation Area. However, this harm would be outweighed 
by the community benefits of the proposal, which would also increase public use of the site 
for sports and cultural purposes (paragraphs 23 to 32). 
Transport: The proposal is supported in principle and all outstanding concerns can be 
addressed and secured through conditions and planning agreement (paragraphs 35 to 37).  
Recommendation 
That Royal Borough of Greenwich, be advised that the application complies with the 
London Plan and Intend to Publish London Plan, for the reasons set out in paragraph 41 of 
this report and does not need to be referred back to the Mayor. 
 
 page 2 
Context 
1 On 17 December 2019 the Mayor of London received documents from the Royal 
Borough of Greenwich notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic 
importance to develop the above site for the above uses. Under the provisions of The 
Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 the Mayor must provide the 
Council with a statement setting out whether he considers that the application complies 
with the London Plan and the Mayor’s Intend to Publish London Plan, and his reasons 
for taking that view. The Mayor may also provide other comments. This report sets out 
information for the Mayor’s consideration in deciding what decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under Category 3D of the Schedule to the Order 
2008:  
• Category 3D: ‘’Development – (a) on land allocated as Green Belt or Metropolitan 
Open Land in the development plan, in proposals for such a plan, or in proposals 
for the alteration or replacement of such a plan; and (b) which would involve the 
construction of a building with a floor space of more than 1,000 square metres or 
a material change in the use of such building.”   
3 Once the Royal Borough of Greenwich has resolved to determine the application, 
it is required to refer it back to the Mayor for his decision, as to whether to direct refusal 
or allow the Council to determine it itself, unless otherwise advised. In this instance, the 
Council does not need to refer the application back to the Mayor.    
4 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA 
website www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
5 The application site is entirely within Metropolitan Open Land and Greenwich 
Park Conservation Area. The red line boundary encompasses the main event site 
(Event Site), the service zone (Boneyard) and includes the Park roads of Blackheath 
Avenue and The Avenue to create a contiguous site. This boundary totals 25.8 
hectares, although the area where activities will take place, the Event Site and 
Boneyard, are 9.5ha and 1.6ha, respectively.  
6 Greenwich Park is a Royal Park and one of the largest single green spaces in 
southeast London, covering 75 hectares. It is part of Greenwich Maritime World 
Heritage Site (WHS) and is a rich historic resource having important heritage, cultural, 
biodiversity, conservation and recreational value. It is protected by various statutory and 
local designations that recognise the Park to be a highly sensitive location. The Park 
and surrounding area is a popular tourist destination as well as being well used by 
London residents and the local community.  
7 The majority of the site is owned by The Royal Parks, a registered charity since 
2017. The northern boundary extends into the site of The Queen’s House, which is in 
the custodianship of the Trustees of the National Maritime Museum. Blackheath Circus 
Field at the southern end of the site lies just outside the Park. It is owned by the Royal 
Borough of Greenwich (RBG). 
 page 3 
8 The site is located to the north of the A2 Shooters Hill, which forms part of the 
Transport for London Road Network (TLRN) and the A206 Romney Road to the north, 
which forms part of the Strategic Road Network (SRN). It is bounded by various 
borough highways and the rest of the Park. The site is served by Cutty Sark (DLR), 
Greenwich (DLR and national rail) and Maze Hill (national rail) stations, 450 metres 620 
metres and 430 metres away respectively from the closest formal entrance to the Fan 
Zone. The site is also well served by bus, with seven services (and two night services) 
within reasonable walking distance of at least two of the entries/exits for spectators. As 
a result, the site has a varied public transport accessibility level (PTAL) ranging from 6 
in the northwest corner to 1 in the centre of the site, on a scale of 0-6b, where 6b is the 
highest. 
Details of the proposal 
9 Temporary use and associated works to create a Fan Zone for the screening of 
football matches and hosting community events during the Euro 2020 Tournament 
comprising erection and installation of media screens; PA towers and media deck; main 
stage; marquees, chalets, gazebos, mobile catering units for food and beverage sales 
and retail merchandising; sponsor activation zones and associated structures; cabins, 
marquees and temporary structures for event management and production offices, 
medical & welfare centre, WCs; external lighting columns; service vehicle parking and 
associated driver facilities; cycle parking; temporary barriers and security fencing with 
entrance gates; and associated works. 
10 The physical works associated with the proposed temporary use involve erecting 
temporary accommodation, equipment and infrastructure with a floor space of 5,500 
square metres.  
Case history 
11 Greenwich Park has hosted a number of significant sporting events. Most 
notably, it was the venue for the 2012 Olympic equestrian events, the riding and running 
disciplines of the modern pentathlon events and the venue for the Paralympic 
equestrian events. This application (LPA Ref: 09/2598/F and GLA Ref: PDU/2505/01)  
was considered and supported by the former Mayor in January 2010. The Park is also 
one of the three start points for the London Marathon and since 2008 has been used for 
the London Half-Marathon. 
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
12 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004, the development plan in force for the area comprises the 2014 Royal Borough of 
Greenwich Local Plan: Core Strategy with detailed policies, and the 2016 London Plan 
(consolidated with Alterations since 2011).   
13 The following are also relevant material considerations:  
• The National Planning Policy Framework 2019 and National Planning Practice 
Guidance.  
• The Mayor’s Intend to Publish London Plan (December 2019), which should 
be taken into account on the basis explained in paragraph 48 of the NPPF. 
 page 4 
14 The relevant issues and corresponding policies are as follows:  
• Metropolitan Open Land  London Plan; the Mayor’s Intend to Publish  
     London Plan; 
• Sports facilities   London Plan; the Mayor’s Intend to Publish  
     London Plan; 
• Community use   London Plan; the Mayor’s Intend to Publish  
     London Plan; 
• Heritage and urban design  London Plan; the Mayor’s Intend to Publish  
     London Plan; 
• Inclusive access   London Plan; the Mayor’s Intend to Publish  
London Plan; Accessible London: achieving 
an inclusive environment SPG; 
• Transport    London Plan; the Mayor’s Intend to Publish
     London Plan; the Mayor’s Transport Strategy  
Principle of development 
15 London Plan Policy 7.17 affords Metropolitan Open Land (MOL) the strongest 
possible protection, whilst Policy G3 of the Mayor’s Intend to Publish London Plan 
states that MOL should be protected from inappropriate development and proposals 
that harm MOL should be refused. Both policies state that national Green Belt policies, 
set out within the NPPF, apply to MOL and therefore MOL is offered the same 
protection as Green Belt. 
16 Paragraph 143 of the NPPF states that inappropriate development is, by 
definition, harmful to Green Belt and should not be approved except in ‘very special 
circumstances’. According to paragraph 144 of the NPPF, when determining 
applications, LPAs should ensure that substantial weight is given to any harm to the 
Green Belt; ‘very special circumstances’ will not exist unless the potential harm to 
Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness, and any other harm resulting from the 
proposal, is clearly outweighed by other considerations. 
17 As set out in paragraph 145 of the revised NPPF, the construction of new 
buildings should be regarded as inappropriate development in the Green Belt. 
Exceptions to this are:  
a) buildings for agriculture and forestry; 
b) the provision of appropriate facilities (in connection with the existing use 
of land or a change of use) for outdoor sport, outdoor recreation, 
cemeteries and burial grounds and allotments; as long as the facilities 
preserve the openness of the Green Belt and do not conflict with the 
purposes of including land within it; 
c) the extension or alteration of a building provided that it does not result 
in disproportionate additions over and above the size of the original 
building; 
d) the replacement of a building, provided the new building is in the same 
use and not materially larger than the one it replaces; 
e) limited infilling in villages; 