  
 page 1 
  planning report GLA/4700/02 
17 February 2020 
former Honey Monster factory site, Southall  
in the London Borough of Ealing   
planning application no.91022FUL  
  
Strategic planning application stage II referral  
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 2007; 
Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 
The proposal 
Part residential mixed use, part employment redevelopment to provide a creative industries hub 
(including film studio), approximately 1,997 new homes and a range of affiliated commercial, 
community and leisure uses in buildings of up to 29-storeys. 
The applicant 
The applicant is Bridge Road Southall 2 Ltd., and the architects are EPR, AHR, PRS and LBA 
Key dates 
Pre-application meetings: 25 July 2018, 25 September 2018 and 4 December 2018 
Stage 1 response: 17 June 2019 
Ealing planning committee: 18 September 2019 
Strategic issues 
Principle of development: The proposed part employment, part residential redevelopment of this 
vacant brownfield Opportunity Area site is strongly supported in principle. The applicant has 
demonstrated that the industrial type floorspace at the site has been maximised.    
Affordable housing: The 35% provision of affordable housing (33% London Affordable Rent, 52% 
shared ownership and 15% Discounted Market Rent) has been verified as the maximum level.  
Urban design: The design responds well to the local context and proposes a high-quality 
redevelopment. The Council have appropriately secured key details of facing materials, rooflines and 
any glazing to ensure a high-quality scheme is delivered.   
Sustainable development: The energy strategy is supported. 
Transport: All transport requirements have been addressed or secured by condition or section 106 
agreement and are supported. 
The Council’s decision 
In this instance Ealing Council has resolved to grant permission, subject to planning conditions and a 
section 106 agreement. 
Recommendation 
That Ealing Council be advised that the Mayor is content for it to determine the case itself, subject to 
any action that the Secretary of State may take, and does not therefore wish to direct refusal or 
direct that he is to be the local planning authority. 

  
 page 2 
Context 
1 On 10 April 2019 the Mayor of London received documents from Ealing Council 
notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance to develop the 
above site for the above uses.  This was referred to the Mayor under the following 
Categories of the Schedule to the Order 2008:  
•  1A.1 “Development which comprises or includes the provision of more than 150 
houses, flats, or houses and flats.”  
• 1B.1(c) “Development (other than development which only comprises the 
provision of houses, flats, or houses and flats) which comprises or includes the 
erection of a building or buildings outside Central London and with a total 
floorspace of more than 15,000 square metres.”    
• 1C.1(c) “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a building 
more than 30 metres high and is outside the City of London.”   
 
2 On 17 June 2019 the Mayor considered planning report GLA/4700/01, and 
subsequently advised Ealing Council that whilst the scheme was generally supported in 
strategic planning terms, the application did not fully comply with the London Plan, for 
the reasons set out in paragraph 67 of that report. 
3 A copy of the above-mentioned report is attached. The essentials of the case 
with regard to the proposal, the site, case history, strategic planning issues and relevant 
policies and guidance are as set out therein, unless otherwise stated in this report. 
Since then, the application has been revised in response to the Mayor’s concerns (see 
below).  On 18 September 2019 Ealing Council decided that it was minded to grant 
planning permission and on 4 February 2020 it advised the Mayor of this decision. 
Under the provisions of Article 5 of the Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) 
Order 2008 the Mayor may allow the draft decision to proceed unchanged, direct  Ealing 
Council under Article 6 to refuse the application or issue a direction to Ealing Council 
under Article 7 that he is to act as the Local Planning Authority for the purposes of 
determining the application  and any connected application. The Mayor has until 10 
February 2020 to notify the Council of his decision and to issue any direction.   
4 The environmental information for the purposes of the Town and Country 
Planning (Environmental Impact Assessment) Regulations 2017 has been taken into 
account in the consideration of this case.  
5 The decision on this case, and the reasons, will be made available on the City Hall 
website www.london.gov.uk.  
Consultation stage issues summary 
6 At consultation stage, Ealing Council was advised that whilst the scheme was 
generally supported in strategic planning terms, the application did not fully comply with 
the London Plan, for the reasons set out in paragraph 67 of that report. 
• Principle of development: The proposed part employment, part residential 
redevelopment is strongly supported in principle. However, the proposal would 
result in a 6% loss of industrial floorspace capacity. Accordingly, the applicant is 
strongly encouraged to increase the provision of industrial-type floorspace.  
  
 page 3 
• Affordable housing: Whilst the 35% affordable housing offer is supported in 
principle, the Financial Viability Assessment is undergoing robust assessment to 
ensure that the maximum contribution is secured in accordance with the London 
Plan, Mayor’s Affordable Housing and Viability SPG, and draft London Plan.   
• Urban design: The design responds well to the local context and proposes a 
high-quality redevelopment. The Council must secure key details of facing 
materials, rooflines and any glazing to ensure a high-quality building is delivered. 
• Inclusive access: The schemes provides appropriate levels of accessible 
accommodation. This is supported and should be secured by condition, along 
with Building Regulations standards M4(2) and M4(3) in line with London Plan 
Policy 7.2 and draft London Plan Policy D3. 
• Sustainable development: Further revisions and information is required before 
the proposals can be considered acceptable and the carbon dioxide savings 
verified. 
• Transport: Given the existing access constraints it is essential that suitable 
active travel and public transport is provided to unlock the full development 
potential of this site. The applicant is required to address transport issues with 
respect to; active travel, healthy streets and highway impact, public transport 
impacts and provision, vehicle parking and trip generation. Transport matters 
which must be secured by planning condition include: cycle parking provision and 
design, a detailed linked travel plan and a Delivery & Servicing Plan (DSP) for 
residential and commercial uses and a construction and servicing plan. 
Strategic planning policy and guidance update 
7 Since consultation stage, Government published a revised version of the NPPF 
in February 2019.  
8 The London Plan (intend to Publish version, December 2019) is now a material 
consideration, and should be taken into account on the basis explained in paragraph 48 
of the NPPF. 
Application update  
9 Since consultation stage, GLA officers have engaged in joint discussions with the 
applicant, the Council, and TfL officers, with a view to addressing the above matters.  
Furthermore, as part of Ealing Council’s draft decision on the case, various planning 
conditions and obligations have been secured to address the above concerns and 
ensure that the development is acceptable in planning terms. An update of issues 
raised at consultation stage is set out below. 
Principle of development   
10 At consultation stage, the proposal to provide part residential mixed use, part 
employment redevelopment including a creative industries hub (including film studio), 
approximately 1,997 new homes and a range of affiliated commercial, community and 
leisure uses in buildings of up to 29-storeys was strongly supported in principle.  
However, on the basis that the proposal would fall short of like for like reprovision of 
industrial capacity, the applicant was strongly encouraged to increase the provision of 
industrial-type floorspace within the proposals. However, following further joint 
  
 page 4 
engagement with the applicant team and the Council on this issue, GLA officers now 
accept that it is not possible to increase the overall provision of industrial floorspace 
within the scheme without compromising the flexibility/specification of that space, or, 
adversely impacting on the core design principles of the site-wide masterplan. 
Accordingly, notwithstanding a 6% shortfall against the reprovision benchmark, GLA 
officers are satisfied that industrial capacity has been maximised in line with London 
Plan Policy 4.4 and Policies E4 and E7 of the Intend to Publish London Plan.  
Affordable housing  
11 At consultation stage the applicant was advised that whilst the 35% affordable 
housing offer (33% London Affordable Rent, 52% shared ownership and 15% 
Discounted Market Rent) was supported in principle, it did not meet the relevant 
threshold for ‘Fast Track’ compliance given the under-provision of industrial type 
floorspace. As such the scheme followed the viability tested route with GLA officers 
rigorously scrutinising the applicant’s financial viability assessment provided by Gerald 
Eve and Ealing Council’s independent review undertaken by DVS. Accordingly it has 
been verified that the provision of 589 affordable units (equivalent to 35% by habitable 
room) is the maximum level that the scheme can afford, and is significantly above the 
established current day viable position (of between 0-5% affordable housing). Whilst not 
‘Fast Track’ route compliant (given the 6% shortfall in industrial reprovision), the 
provision of 35% affordable housing responds positively to the objectives of the Mayor’s 
intend to publish London Plan and the Affordable Housing and Viability SPG, and is 
strongly supported. Moreover, given the 30-35% front loaded growth offer secured, and 
the comparatively minor shortfall against the industrial reprovision benchmark in this 
case, the absence of a late stage review is accepted in this case. The Council has, 
nevertheless, secured the affordability levels and early stage viability review within the 
Section 106 agreement. 
Urban design  
12 At consultation stage it was reported that the design responded well to the local 
context and delivered a high-quality redevelopment. The Council was advised to secure 
key details of facing materials, rooflines and any glazing to ensure a high-quality 
building is delivered. As part of the Council’s draft decision notice it has secured the 
submission of details/sample materials for approval in addition to ensuring the 
development is carried out fully in accordance with the Fire Safety Design (Planning 
Stage) prepared by Fire & Risk Solutions Ltd. Accordingly, the application is acceptable 
in strategic design terms.  
Sustainable development   
13 At consultation stage the applicant and Council were advised that further 
revisions and information is required on the energy strategy before the proposals could 
be considered acceptable and the carbon dioxide savings verified. Since then the 
applicant has engaged with GLA officers to resolve these issued through the 
submission of additional justification and technical details. In addition to this the borough 
has secured compliance with the approved energy strategy. The application does not 
raise any strategic concerns with respect to sustainable development.  
Transport  