 page 1 
  planning report GLA/5095/01  
  10 February 2020 
300 Harrow Road  
in the City of Westminster 
planning application no.19/09638/FULL  
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 2007; 
Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 
The proposal 
Demolition of existing community centre and nursery buildings and redevelopment of the site to 
provide a replacement community centre and nursey, office space, a café and 112 new homes 
across 3 blocks ranging between 5-16 storeys. 
The applicant 
The applicant is Westminster City Council and the architect is Child Graddon Lewis.  
Strategic issues 
Principle of development: The residential-led intensification of the site, providing an additional 
112 residential units alongside increased community and retail space is supported (paragraphs 
11-17). 
Housing: The applicant is proposing 50% affordable housing (by habitable room) at a tenure split 
of 53/47 in favour of the intermediate tenure. This affordable housing offer meets the relevant 
threshold for public land and is eligible for the Fast Track Route. An early stage review must be 
appropriately secured as part of any future s.106 (paragraphs 18-26). 
Urban design: The design quality of the scheme is of high quality and the site appropriately 
optimised. The Council should secure the submission of key facing materials (paragraphs 27-33). 
Sustainable development: Further information and justification is required in respect of energy, 
flood risk and drainage and urban greening (paragraphs 34-36). 
Transport: The applicant should address issues in respect of; healthy streets, vehicle parking 
and cycle parking. The Council is required to secure conditions/obligations in respect to; a 
delivery and servicing plan, a construction management plan, a travel plan, vehicle parking and 
cycle parking (paragraphs 37-42). 
Recommendation 
That Westminster City Council be advised that while the scheme is supported in principle, the 
application does not comply with the London Plan and Intend to Publish London Plan for the 
reasons set out in paragraph 46 of this report; however, the possible remedies set out in that 
paragraph could address these deficiencies. 
 
 page 2 
Context 
1 On 18 December 2019 the Mayor of London received documents from 
Westminster City Council notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic 
importance to develop the above site for the above uses. Under the provisions of The 
Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 the Mayor must provide the 
Council with a statement setting out whether he considers that the application complies 
with the London Plan, and his reasons for taking that view.  The Mayor may also 
provide other comments. This report sets out information for the Mayor’s use in deciding 
what decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under the following Categories of the Schedule to the 
Order 2008:  
• Category 1C: “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a 
building of (c) more than 30 metres high and is outside the City of London.” 
3 Once Westminster City Council has resolved to determine the application, it is 
required to refer it back to the Mayor for his decision as to whether to direct refusal; take 
it over for his own determination; or allow the Council to determine it itself. 
4 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA 
website www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
5 The site is located on the southern edge of Grand Union Canal and bound by 
Harrow Road on its western edge. The site benefits from a significant area of river 
frontage along its northern border. The site extends south of the canal being wrapped 
by Cirencester Street and Woodchester Square at its southern and eastern boundary. 
The site owned by Westminster Council and currently comprises a 21-storey residential 
tower block (Wilmcote House) and nursery and community facilities which serve the 
existing residents of the site and local area. The surrounds of the plot are largely 
characterised by residential properties with a mix of uses infilling the wider urban grain. 
South of the plot there is Our Lady of Dolours RC School, to the west of the plot is the 
Westminster Academy, a care home is located beyond the western edge of the site. To 
the north of the site along Harrow Road there are a range of commercial and retail uses.   
6 The site fronts Harrow Road, which forms part of the Strategic Road Network and 
is currently accessed via Cirencester Street and Woodchester Square, which form part 
of the borough highway. The nearest section of the Transport for London Road Network 
is the Westway, located approximately 420 metres to the south of the site. The nearest 
London Underground station is Royal Oak, approximately 480 metres to the south of the 
site which is served by Circle and Hammersmith and City line services. Warwick 
Avenue station is also within walking distance. The site is also served by two bus 
routes, which run along Harrow Road. The records a Public Transport Access Level 
(PTAL) of 4, on a scale of 0-6b, where 6b represents the most accessible.  
  
 page 3 
Details of the proposal 
7 Demolition of existing nursery and community centre buildings and 
redevelopment of the site to provide a replacement community centre and nursey, office 
space, a café and 112 new homes across 3 blocks ranging between 5-16 storeys. 
Case history 
8 The applicant and the Greater London Authority held a pre-application meeting 
on 14 May 2019 with a follow up meeting taking place on 12 September 2019 to discuss 
the above proposal at the above site. GLA officers concluded that the residential-led 
intensification of the site, to provide an additional 120 residential units was supported in 
principle. The applicant was advised to address issues in respect to; housing, the 
community and commercial uses, affordable housing, urban design, inclusive access, 
sustainable development and transport.   
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
9 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004, the development plan in force for the area is the Westminster’s City Plan: 
Consolidated with Basement and Mixed Use Revisions (2016); the saved policies in the 
Westminster Unitary Development Plan (2007, saved 2010); and the 2016 London Plan 
(Consolidated with Alterations since 2011). 
10 The following are relevant material considerations:   
• The National Planning Policy Framework (revised February 2019);  
• National Planning Practice Guidance;  
• The London Plan Intend to Publish version (December 2019);  
• The draft Westminster City Plan 2019-2040. 
 
• Housing London Plan; Housing SPG; Housing Strategy; Shaping 
Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal Recreation SPG; 
Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character and Context SPG; 
• Retail London Plan;  
• Community uses London Plan; Social Infrastructure SPG; 
• Affordable housing London Plan; Housing SPG; Housing Strategy;  
• Urban design London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character and 
Context SPG; Housing SPG; Shaping Neighbourhoods: 
Play and Informal Recreation SPG 
• Access London Plan; Accessible London: achieving an inclusive 
environment SPG;  
• Sustainable development London Plan; Sustainable Design and Construction 
SPG; Mayor’s Environment strategy; 
• Transport London Plan; Mayor’s Transport Strategy. 
  
  
 page 4 
Principle of development     
Estate regeneration  
11 London Plan Policy 3.14 requires that estate renewal takes into account the 
regeneration benefits to the local community, the proportion of affordable housing in the 
surrounding area and the amount of affordable housing intended to be provided 
elsewhere in the borough. Policy H8 of the Mayors intend to publish London Plan states 
at paragraph 4.8.3 that the range of physical interventions that may be required to 
support the delivery of estate regeneration projects include: repairs to, and 
refurbishment of, existing homes; building new homes on ‘infill’ sites; and demolition 
and redevelopment. For the avoidance of doubt GLA officers consider the proposals to 
fall within this definition of infill development. Paragraph 4.8.4 states that regardless of 
whether an estate regeneration project includes the demolition and replacement of 
affordable homes, it is important that all such schemes are delivered with existing and 
new residents and communities in mind. In the Good Practice Guide to Estate 
Regeneration (GPGER), the Mayor is clear that when considering options to deliver 
estate regeneration projects, boroughs, housing associations and their partners should 
always consider alternative options to demolition first, the applicant’s retention of the 
existing residential block is accordingly supported in principle. 
12 The GPGER sets out the Mayor’s aspirations for full and transparent 
consultation, and meaningful ongoing involvement with estate residents throughout the 
regeneration process, to ensure resident support. The City Council has submitted a 
Statement of Community Involvement (SCI) as part of this application. It outlines the 
process of community engagement the City Council undertook with the existing 
residents and community which use the site. Through the application process the City 
Council has held 7 meetings with various stakeholder groups and the community dating 
back to December 2018, most recently with local residents, politicians and amenity 
groups in July 2019 for the second phase public exhibition. Alongside this there is an 
ongoing engagement through the Section 105 letters to its secure tenants issued in 
June 2019 and ongoing discussions with the operators of the existing community and 
nursery space to shape the design of the proposals. As a result of this comprehensive 
consultation process the applicant has followed the best practice guidance outlined 
above. 
Housing   
13 London Plan Policy 3.3 and Policy H1 of the Mayor’s intend to publish London 
Plan seek to increase the supply of housing in the capital, and the Mayor’s intend to 
publish London Plan sets Westminster a ten-year target of 9,850 new homes for 
Westminster. The proposed scheme would provide 112 new homes, which pro rata 
equates to 11.3% of the boroughs target on an annualised basis. The increase in the 
housing targets identified in the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan evidences the 
continued need for housing in the borough. The principle of the intensified residential 
uses proposed is therefore supported.    
Community space  
14 London Plan Policy 3.16 and Policy S1 of the Mayors intend to publish London 
Plan seek to protect and enhance social infrastructure provision and resists proposals 
that would result in the loss of social infrastructure in areas of defined need for that type 