 page 1 
  
planning report GLA/5370/01 
 10 February 2020 
Brethren Meeting Hall, Beckenham Hill Road  
in the London Borough of Lewisham 
planning application no. DC/19/114278  
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 
2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
The demolition of the single storey building at Brethren Hall and erection of a part one, part 
two storey building comprising new church space providing an auditorium capacity for 985 
people, ancillary functions, outdoor amenity space, together with the provision of 151 car 
parking spaces.  
The applicant 
The applicant is Citygate Church Limited and the architect is Stephen Davy Peter Smith 
Architects.  
Strategic issues 
Principle of development: The site lies entirely within Metropolitan Open Land. Whilst the 
replacement and enhancement of social infrastructure on the site could be supported, the 
building is materially larger than the existing building and therefore constitutes inappropriate 
development within the MOL. The acceptability of the proposal would be dependent upon 
evidencing that any harm to the MOL is outweighed by ‘very special circumstances’ (VSC). 
At present, the presented VSC do not outweigh harm to the MOL. The applicant should also 
seek to reduce the bulk of the building to reduce impact upon openness. 
Urban design: The applicant should provide further visualisations to assist in the 
assessment of impact on the MOL.  
Transport:  Further information is required including justification for the level of cycle parking 
and the proposed phased provision. The number of car parking spaces should be reduced.   
Sustainability: Further information is required regarding energy, water efficiency and green 
infrastructure.  
Recommendation 
That Lewisham Council be advised that the application does not comply with the London 
Plan and the Mayor’s Intend to Publish London Plan for the reasons set out in paragraph 79 
of this report; but that the possible remedies set out in that paragraph could address these 
deficiencies.  
 
 page 2 
Context 
1 On 25 November 2019 the Mayor of London received documents from Lewisham 
Council notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance to 
develop the above site for the above uses. Under the provisions of The Town & Country 
Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 the Mayor must provide the Council with a 
statement setting out whether he considers that the application complies with the 
London Plan, and his reasons for taking that view. The Mayor may also provide other 
comments. This report sets out information for the Mayor’s use in deciding what 
decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under Category 3D of the Schedule to the Order 
2008: 
• 3D: Development— (a) on land allocated as Green Belt or Metropolitan Open 
Land in the development plan, in proposals for such a plan, or in proposals for 
the alteration or replacement of such a plan; and (b) which would involve the 
construction of a building with a floorspace of more than 1,000 square metres or 
a material change in the use of such a building. 
3 Once Lewisham Council has resolved to determine the application, it is required 
to refer it back to the Mayor for his decision, as to whether to direct refusal or allow the 
Council to determine it itself, unless otherwise advised. In this instance if the Council 
resolves to refuse permission it need not refer the application back to the Mayor.     
4 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA 
website www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
5 The site is approximately 1.47ha and located on Beckenham Hill Road (A2015). 
It is bound to the south by Beckenham Hill Road, to the east by private playing fields 
and to the west by Sedgehill School. To the north is a housing estate consisting of 3 
storey blocks with pitched roofs.  
6 The site is occupied by a single storey building which was used as a place of 
worship by the Plymouth Brethren for nearly 30 years. There is an extensive area of car 
parking within the site and vehicle access is from Beckenham Hill Road. The site is 
currently vacant.  
7 The building is a detached single storey brick building with an internal floor area 
of 660 sq.m. that has a seating capacity of around 800 people in a main meeting hall.  
8 The site is located within Metropolitan Open Land (MOL) and included in a Green 
Chain Area within Lewisham’s adopted policies map. 
9 The nearest section of the Transport for London Road Network (TLRN) is (A21) 
Bromley Road, approximately 850 metres away. The nearest section of the Strategic 
Road Network (SRN) is (A2015) Beckenham Hill Road, adjacent to the site’s 
southern boundary. 
 
 page 3 
10 The nearest bus stops and national rail station (Beckenham Hill Station), are 
approximately 0.33 and 0.5 kilometres away respectively. As there is only one bus route 
and the Thameslink service within reasonable walking distance, the site has a Public 
Transport Access Level (PTAL) of 2 (on a scale from 0-6b, where 6b is the highest). 
11 The nearest existing cycle route is the National Cycle Network: Green Chain – 
Beckenham Place Park, approximately 1.25 kilometres away. There is a proposed 
Quietway route in a similar location. 
Details of the proposal 
12 The proposal consists of the demolition of the existing building and construction 
of a new part one storey part  two storey building comprising of:  
• 6,435 sq.m. (GIA) of church space 
•  auditorium capacity for 985 people 
•  ancillary function space  
•  outdoor amenity space 
• 151 car parking spaces 
13 Case history 
14 There is no relevant strategic planning history associated with this site. The 
applicant has not engaged in any pre-application discussions with the GLA regarding 
the proposal. 
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
15 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004, the development plan in force for the area is the Lewisham Core Strategy 2011; 
Lewisham Site Allocations Local Plan 2013; Lewisham Development Management 
Local Plan 2014; Supplementary Planning documents; and, the 2016 London Plan 
(Consolidated with alterations since 2011).   
16 The following are relevant material considerations:  
• The National Planning Policy Framework and National Planning Practice 
Guidance (February 2019);  
• The London Plan intend to publish version (December 2019) which should be 
taken into account on the basis explained in paragraph 48 of the NPPF. 
 
17 The relevant issues and corresponding policies are as follows:   
• Metropolitan Open Land        London Plan; 
• Social infrastructure         London Plan; Social Infrastructure SPG; 
• Urban design         London Plan;  
• Sustainable Development     London Plan; London Environment Strategy; 
• Transport         London Plan; the Mayor’s Transport Strategy;  
 page 4 
 
Principle of development 
18 London Plan Policy 7.16 and Policy G2 of the Mayor’s Intend to Publish 
London Plan affords London’s Metropolitan Open Land (MOL) the strongest possible 
protection. Paragraph 8.2.1 of the Mayor’s Intend to Publish London Plan and Policy 
7.17 of the London Plan are clear that national policy with regard to the Green Belt 
extends to the capital’s MOL in accordance with national guidance. Therefore, where 
the NPPF makes reference to the Green Belt, this should be read as equally applying 
to MOL. Policy G3 of the Mayor’s Intend to Publish London Plan states that MOL 
should be protected from inappropriate development and proposals that harm MOL 
should be refused.  
19 Chapter 13 of the revised NPPF (Protecting Green Belt land) provides guidance 
on development proposals which impact the Green Belt, and by extension, MOL. 
Paragraph 133 of the NPPF states that the fundamental characteristic of the Green Belt 
is its openness and its permanence and a key purpose of the Green Belt is to prevent 
encroachment, which would reduce green space, to check sprawl of built up areas and 
to assist in urban regeneration, by encouraging the ‘recycling’ of derelict and other 
urban land, as set out in paragraph 134. 
20 Paragraph 143 of the NPPF states that inappropriate development is, by 
definition, harmful to the Green Belt and should not be approved except in ‘very special 
circumstances’. When determining applications, LPAs should ensure that substantial 
weight is given to any harm to the Green Belt. ‘Very Special Circumstances’ will not 
exist unless the potential harm to the Green Belt by reason of inappropriateness, or any 
other harm, is clearly outweighed by other considerations.  
21 The construction of new buildings should be regarded as inappropriate 
development, as set out in paragraph 145 with some exceptions, including d) the 
replacement of a building, provided the new building is in the same use and not 
materially larger than the one it replaces.  
 
22 The proposed building would replace an existing building which has previously 
been in community use. However, the figures provided by the applicant suggest the 
existing internal floor area is 660 sq.m. with a seating capacity of around 800 people. 
The proposal is for a new building comprising 6,435 sq.m. of gross internal area. 
 
23 As the proposed building is materially larger than the one it replaces, the 
development would constitute ‘inappropriate development’. Inappropriateness is, by 
definition, harmful; and as such the development should be refused except in ‘Very 
Special Circumstances’. Very Special Circumstances will only exist where harm to the 
Green Belt/MOL by reasons of inappropriateness, and any other harm, is clearly 
outweighed by other considerations. It is therefore necessary to assess the impact on 
the openness of the MOL (both visual and volumetric) and the harm to Green Belt 
and MOL purposes in order to consider whether this is outweighed by Very Special 
Circumstances (VSC).  
 
  