 page 1 
  planning report GLA/2265i/02 
3 February 2020 
156 Beddington Lane  
in the London Borough of Sutton   
planning application no.  DM2019/01225 
Strategic planning application stage II referral  
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 
and 2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Change of use from existing waste land use to B8 use (storage and distribution) 
The applicant 
The applicant is 777 Land Holdings Ltd and the agents are BPP Consulting Ltd.   
Key dates 
Stage 1 report: 14 October 2019 
Council’s Committee meeting: 8 January 2020 
Strategic issues 
Principle of Development: The proposed change of use to a B8 storage and 
distribution use complies with the SIL designation of the site. The site is proposed to be 
released in the Issues and Preferred Options Document for the emerging South 
London Waste Plan and evidence has been provided to demonstrate appropriate  
capacity/intensification of neighbouring sites. The proposal is in accordance with 
Policies 5.17 and 5.18 of the London Plan and Policies SI8 and SI9 of the Mayor’s 
Intend to Publish London Plan.  
Transport: Appropriate conditions have been secured to reduce the impact of freight 
traffic and ensure cycle parking and blue badge parking requirements are met.  
The Council’s decision 
In this instance Sutton Council has resolved to grant planning permission.  
Recommendation 
That Sutton Council be advised that the Mayor is content for it to determine the case 
itself, subject to any action that the Secretary of State may take, and does not 
therefore wish to direct refusal.  
 
 
 page 2 
  
 page 3 
Context 
1 On 8 August 2019 the Mayor of London received documents from Sutton Council 
notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance to develop the 
above site for the above uses.  This was referred to the Mayor under Category 3G of 
the Schedule to the Order 2008:  
1. Development which- 
(a) Involves a material change of use;  
(b) Does not accord with one or more provisions of the development plan in 
force in the area in which the application site is situated, 
(c) Where the application site is used or designed to be used wholly or mainly 
for the purpose of treating, keeping, processing, recovering or disposing of 
refuse or waste materials; and 
(d) The application site- 
(i) Occupies more than 0.5 hectares; or 
(iii) Contains an installation with a capacity for a throughput of more 
than 20,000 tonnes per annum of waste. 
2 On  14 October 2019 the Mayor considered planning report GLA/2265i/01 and 
subsequently advised Sutton Council that the application was acceptable in principle, 
but that it did not fully comply with the London Plan and draft London Plan for the 
reasons set out in paragraph 38 of the above-mentioned report.  However, the 
resolution of those issues could lead to the application being fully compliant with the 
London Plan and draft London Plan. 
3 A copy of the above-mentioned report is attached.  The essentials of the case 
with regard to the proposal, the site, case history, strategic planning issues and relevant 
policies and guidance are as set out therein, unless otherwise stated in this report.  On 
8 January 2020  Sutton Council decided that it was minded to grant planning permission 
. Under the provisions of Article 5 of the Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) 
Order 2008 the Mayor may allow the draft decision to proceed unchanged or direct 
Sutton Council under Article 6 to refuse the application.  
4 The decision on this case, and the reasons, will be made available on the GLA’s 
website www.london.gov.uk. 
Consultation stage issues summary 
5 At  consultation stage, Sutton Council was advised that the application is 
supported in principle; however, the resolution of the outstanding issues set out below 
would be required in order for the application to be fully compliant with the London Plan 
and draft London Plan: 
• Principle of development: Whilst the proposed change of use to a B8 storage 
and distribution use complies with the SIL designation of the site, confirmation 
is required from the South London Waste Plan group that the site can be 
 page 4 
released as a safeguarded waste site. Evidence should be provided to robustly 
demonstrate how the loss of the safeguarded waste site can be compensated 
with appropriate capacity/ intensification of neighbouring sites in accordance 
with Policies 5.17 and 5.18 of the London Plan and Policies SI9 and SI7 of the 
draft London Plan.  
• Transport: Further information is requested to confirm the traffic impact of the 
proposed development, including confirmation on car and cycle parking 
numbers and the provision of a Delivery and Servicing Plan to reduce the 
impact of freight traffic. 
 
Update 
 
6 Since Stage 1, GLA officers have reviewed further information, and engaged in 
discussions with the applicant and Sutton Council with a view to addressing the 
outstanding matters.  Furthermore, as part of the Council’s draft decision on the case, 
various planning conditions have been proposed to ensure that the development is 
acceptable in planning terms. 
Principle of Development  
 
At Stage 1, officers advised that the loss of a safeguarded waste site to B8 use may be 
acceptable subject to: 
• confirmation that the new South London Waste Plan is not intending to include the 
156 Beddington Lane site in its waste management allocations/apportionment in 
the future;  
• assurance that the quantum of safeguarded waste capacity proposed to be 
displaced from 156 Beddington Lane (38,129tpa) would be re-provided as 
genuine additional capacity at 154a Beddington Lane (to be secured by Section 
106 agreement); and,  
• evidence that further intensification of 154a Beddington Lane in response to the 
emerging objectives of the new South London Waste Plan would be feasible and 
deliverable within the new plan period.  
 
7 The South London Waste Technical Paper, referred to in the Stage 1 response, 
noted the applicant’s intention to release the 156 Beddington Lane for other uses and 
provide compensatory capacity at the neighbouring site 154a Beddington Lane (777 
Recycling).   
8 Since the consultation stage, the Issues and Preferred Options Document for the 
South London Waste Plan has been released for consultation (October 2019). This 
represents progression of the new South London Waste Plan from the evidence base 
technical paper that officers reported on at Stage 1.  
9 Appendix 2 of the Issues and Preferred Options Document for the South London 
Waste Plan lists ‘the site’ (site 96 Severnside Waste Paper) as closed and capacity 
transferred to Site S11: TGM Environmental (112 Beddington Lane).  