 page 1 
   
planning report GLA/4839/01 
17 February 2020 
Albany Park, Hertford Road  
in the London Borough of Enfield  
planning application no. 19/02738/RE4  
  
Strategic planning application - combined stage I and stage II referral  
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 
and 2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
A flood alleviation scheme comprising construction of a new watercourse, flood storage 
area, combined footpath-cycleway, security fencing, revised landscape and playing 
fields. 
The applicant 
The applicant is Enfield Council. 
Key dates: 
Combined Stage 1 & 2 referral: 4 February 2020 
Council’s committee meeting: 6 November 2019  
Strategic issues summary: 
Land use principle: The proposal for flood alleviation causes loss of some proportion 
(44%) of existing playing fields. However, the benefits of the proposed development to 
prevent future flooding in the area, improvements to biodiversity and landscaping of the 
Park outweigh the harm. Therefore, the proposal complies with Policies 5.12 and 5.13 
of the London Plan and Policies SI.12 and SI.13 of the Mayor’s Intend to Publish 
London Plan. 
The Council’s decision 
In this instance, Enfield Council has resolved to grant permission, subject to conditions. 
Recommendation 
That Enfield Council be advised that the Mayor is content for it to determine the case 
itself, subject to any action that the Secretary of State may take, and does not therefore 
wish to direct refusal. 
 
 

 page 2 
Context  
1 On 6 November 2019, Enfield Council decided that it was minded to grant 
planning permission and on 4 February 2020 it advised the Mayor of this decision, and 
sent a (combined stage 1 and 2) referral notifying him of a planning application of 
potential strategic importance to develop the above site for the above uses. 
2 The application was referred to the Mayor under the Category 3C of the Schedule to 
the Order 2008: 
• Category 3C: ”Development which is likely to prejudice the use as a playing field 
of more than 2 hectares of land which – (a) is used as a playing field at the time 
the relevant application for planning permission is made; or (b) has at any time in 
the five years before the making of the application been used as a playing field.”  
3 Under the provisions of Article 5 of the Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) 
Order 2008 the Mayor may allow the draft decision to proceed unchanged, or direct Enfield 
Council under Article 6 to refuse the application. The Mayor has until 17 February 2020 to 
notify the Council of his decision and to issue any direction.    
4 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA 
website www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
5 The application site is located within Albany Park which has an area of 13.3 
hectares located in the northern part of Enfield, to the east of the A10. The whole of the 
park is within Metropolitan Open Land, and it is a designated Local Open Space with 
existing playing fields. The eastern half and portion of the site in the north are designated 
Flood Zone 2. As shown below, currently, the application site has 3 tennis courts, 9 
football pitches, formal and informal playgrounds, and a Multi-Use-Games Area (MUGA).  
    
The application site and the Albany Park River Restoration and Flood Alleviation scheme : Source: Applicant’s planning application documentation. 

 page 3 
Details of the proposal 
6 The planning application seeks permission for a flood alleviation scheme comprising 
construction of a new watercourse, flood storage area, combined footpath-cycleway, 
security fencing, revised landscape and playing fields. 
Case history 
7 There is no case history relevant to the current planning application. 
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
8 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004, the development plan in force for the area comprises the 2010 Enfield Core Strategy 
Development Plan and the 2016 London Plan (consolidated with Alterations since 2011).   
9 The following are also relevant material considerations:  
• The National Planning Policy Framework 2019 and National Planning Practice 
Guidance.  
• The Mayor’s Intend to Publish London Plan (December 2019). 
10 The relevant issues and corresponding policies are as follows:  
• Playing fields/open space  London Plan; Intend to Publish London Plan 
• Metropolitan Open Land  London Plan; Intend to Publish London Plan; 
• Sustainable development  London Plan; Intend to Publish London Plan;                  
                                                      Sustainable Design and Construction SPG;    
                                                      Mayor’s Environment Strategy;  
Principle of development: flood alleviation and loss of playing fields 
11 Flood risk management: The proposed flood alleviation scheme complies with 
London Plan Policy 5.12 and the Mayor’s Intend to Publish London Plan Policy SI.12 
‘Flood risk management’. The surface water drainage strategy for the proposed 
development complies with London Plan Policy 5.13 and the Mayor’s Intend to Publish 
London Plan Policy SI.13 ‘Sustainable drainage’. The proposal has been developed in 
collaboration with the Environment Agency and the Greater London Authority. Both 
organisations support the proposal and are providing funding to the scheme. High levels 
of vegetation and landscaping are proposed, which is welcomed. These measures would 
enhance biodiversity.  
12 Loss of playing fields: Policy 7.18 of the London Plan and Policy S5 of the Mayor’s 
Intend to Publish London Plan resist the loss of local protected open spaces including 
playing fields unless equivalent or better quality provision is made within the local 
catchment area. Replacement of one type of open space with another is unacceptable 
unless an up to date needs assessment demonstrates that this would be appropriate.   
13 As shown below in the table and the corresponding scaled drawings, there would 
be a loss of (44%) of the existing playing fields, which is equivalent to an area of 2.94 
hectares. Whilst this is regrettable and not in compliance with Policy 7.18 of the London 
Plan and Policy S5 of the Mayor’s Intend to Publish, the benefits of the proposal which 
 page 4 
include prevention of future flooding - reducing flood risk to over 200 local properties, 
improvements to biodiversity and enhanced landscaping of the Park outweigh the harm 
the development causes in terms of loss of part of the playing fields. Therefore, the 
proposal is supported.   
14 Table of areas of existing, retained and lost playing fields: 
Area of existing playing fields 67,490 sq.m. 
Area of retained playing fields 38,110 sq.m. 
Area of lost playing fields 29,380 sq.m. 
   
The existing playing fields (left), to be retained (middle) and to be lost (right).  
Conclusion 
15 The proposed flood alleviation causes loss of part of the existing playing fields. 
However, the benefits of the proposed development outweigh the harm that would be 
caused. The proposal complies with Policies 5.12 and 5.13 of the London Plan and SI.12 
and SI.13 of the Mayor’s Intend to Publish London Plan, and it is supported. 
GLA Funding 
16 The Greater London Authority is providing a financial contribution of £346.000 
towards the cost of the proposed works. 
Transport 
17 TfL considers there to be no outstanding strategic transport issues and note 
conditions to be implemented addressing construction management, cycle storage and 
electric vehicle charging points. TfL wish to be consulted on these prior to their discharge. 
It is acknowledged and welcomed that excavated material will remain on site, reducing 
the landscape works impact upon the surrounding highway network. 
 
 
