 page 1 
  
planning report GLA/4903/02 
3 February 2020 
1 Bradfield Road, Silvertown 
in the London Borough of Newham  
planning application no. 19/00517/FUL 
  
Strategic planning application stage II referral  
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 
2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Redevelopment to provide a single building of 12 storeys in height; comprising 55 residential 
units with associated cycle parking, plant, refuse, amenity areas and ancillary works.  
The applicant 
The applicants are E16 Holdings Limited and the architect is Stockwool. 
Key Dates 
Stage 1 report: 20 May 2019 
Planning Committee meeting: 11 September 2019  
Strategic issues 
Principle: The principle of a residential scheme delivering 55 new homes within the Royal 
Docks and Beckton Riverside Opportunity Area remains strongly supported in accordance with 
Policies 2.13 and 3.3 of the London Plan, as well as Policies SD1 and H1 of the intend to publish 
London Plan. 
Housing: 35% affordable housing by habitable room, with an overall tenure split of 75% social 
rent (affordable rent) / 25% intermediate (shared ownership). The scheme remains eligible for 
fast track consideration, although in this instance both early and late stage reviews have been 
secured in the s106 agreement in accordance with local policy. 
Other matters relating to urban design, sustainable development and transport have been 
satisfactorily resolved.   
The Council’s decision 
In this instance Newham Council has resolved to grant planning permission. 
 
 page 2 
 
Context 
1 On 10 April 2019, the Mayor of London received documents from Newham Council 
notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance to develop the 
above site for the above uses. This was referred to the Mayor under Category 1C of the 
Schedule to the Order 2008: 
• 1C(c): “Development which comprises or includes a building more than 30 metres high 
and outside the city of London” 
2 On 20 May 2019 the Mayor considered planning report GLA/4903/01, and 
subsequently advised Newham Council that the application did not comply with the London 
Plan and draft London Plan, for the reasons set out in paragraph 53 of the above-mentioned 
report. 
3 A copy of the above-mentioned report is attached. The essentials of the case with 
regard to the proposal, the site, case history, strategic planning issues and relevant policies and 
guidance are as set out therein, unless otherwise stated in this report. Since then, further 
details provided in response to the Mayor’s concerns. On 11 September 2019, Newham Council 
decided that it was minded to grant planning permission for the application. Under the 
provisions of Article 5 of the Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 the 
Mayor may allow the draft decision to proceed unchanged, direct Newham Council under 
Article 6 to refuse the application or issue a direction to Newham Council under Article 7 that 
he is to act as the Local Planning Authority for the purposes of determining the application and 
any connected application. 
4 The decision on this case, and the reasons, will be made available on the GLA’s website 
www.london.gov.uk. 
Consultation stage issues summary 
5 At the consultation stage Newham Council were advised that the application did not 
comply with the London Plan and draft London Plan, for the following reasons set out in 
paragraph 53 of the above-mentioned report: 
• Principle of Land Use: The principle of a residential scheme delivering 55 new homes 
within the Royal Docks and Beckton Riverside Opportunity Area is strongly supported 
in accordance with Policies 2.13 and 3.3 of the London Plan, as well as Policies SD1 
and H1 of the draft London Plan.  
Recommendation 
That Newham Council be advised that the Mayor is content for it to determine the case itself, 
subject to any action that the Secretary of State may take, and does not therefore wish to 
direct refusal or direct that he is to be the local planning authority. 
 page 3 
• Housing: 35% affordable housing by habitable room, with an overall tenure split of 
75% social rent (affordable rent)/25% intermediate (Shared Ownership). The 
quantum of affordable housing is strongly supported in accordance with Policies 3.11 
and 3.12 of the London Plan, as well as Policies H5 and H6 of the draft London Plan. 
Subject to exploring grant funding, the scheme complies with the Fast Track Route 
outlined in Policy H6 and the Mayor’s Affordable Housing and Viability SPG. An early 
review mechanism must be secured.  
• Urban design: The design complies with the principles of chapter seven in the London 
Plan and chapter three of the draft London Plan. Incorporation of an active 
commercial use at ground floor should be considered further. Measures to mitigate 
noise and disturbance on future occupants from the adjacent DLR to be secured by 
condition.  
• Sustainable Development: Further revisions and information are required before the 
proposals can be considered acceptable to comply with Policies 5.2, 5.13 and 5.15 of 
the London Plan as well as Policies SI5, SI2 and SI13 of the draft London Plan. Detailed 
comments have been forwarded to the LPA and the applicant under separate cover in 
this regard.  
• Transport: On-site blue badge provision required in accordance with by Policy T6 of 
the draft London Plan. Contributions towards the future entry treatment of Bradfield 
Road, electric vehicle charging points, cycle parking, a revised travel assessment, 
travel plan, delivery and servicing plan and construction logistics plan must all be 
secured by conditions of approval and the s106 Legal agreement.  
Application and policy update 
6 Since Stage 1, The Report of the Examination in Public of the draft London Plan was 
published in October 2019, and the London Plan – intend to publish version (December 2019) 
has subsequently been published and submitted to the Secretary of State. This should be taken 
into account on the basis described in the NPPF.  
7 Since the consultation stage, GLA officers have engaged in joint discussions with the 
applicant, Newham Council and TfL officers with a view to addressing the above matters. As 
part of the Council’s draft decision on the case, various planning conditions and a s106 legal 
agreement have been proposed to address the above concerns and ensure that the 
development is acceptable in planning terms.  
Principle of development 
8 As at consultation stage, the principle of a residential development delivering 55 new 
homes within the Royal Docks and Beckton Riverside Opportunity Area remains strongly 
supported in accordance with Policies 2.13 and 3.3 of the London Plan, as well as Policies SD1 
and H1 of the intend to publish London Plan. 
Housing 
9 The scheme proposes 35% affordable housing, delivered with a tenure split of 75% 
social rent to 25% intermediate (shared ownership) when measured by habitable room. The 
 page 4 
quantum and tenure of affordable housing remains strongly supported in accordance with 
Policies 3.11 and 3.12 of the London Plan, as well as Policies H5 and H6 of the intend to 
publish London Plan. The scheme remains eligible for the fast track consideration, although 
in this instance both early and late stage review mechanisms have been secured in the s106 
agreement in accordance with local policy. 
10 All consultation stage matters relating to housing have been satisfactorily addressed 
and the application is in accordance with the policies of the London Plan and the intend to 
publish London Plan. 
Urban design 
11 The layout, height, massing and scale of the proposed building were supported at 
consultation stage, being consistent with Policy 7.5 of the London Plan and Policies D1 and 
D2 of the draft London Plan. No amendments have been incorporated with regard to the 
overall architectural quality of the scheme, which remains supported. 
12 Conditions of approval have been adopted to secure suitable mitigation measures 
avoiding noise and vibration impacts from the DLR and North Woolwich Road. All other 
outstanding matters regarding urban design treatment have been satisfactorily addressed 
and the application is in accordance with the policies of the London Plan and the intend to 
publish London Plan. 
Sustainable development 
13 At consultation stage, further revisions and information were required before the 
proposals could be considered to comply with Policies 5.2, 5.13 and 5.15 of the London Plan 
as well as Policies SI5, SI2 and SI13 of the intend to publish London Plan.  
14 Conditions of approval have been secured regarding provision for connectivity to a 
future district heating network, and the adoption of a revised energy strategy in accordance 
with GLA guidance. A carbon offset contribution of £78,649 has been secured in the s106 
agreement, with provision for this figure to be increased where required on review of a 
revised energy strategy.  
15 Outstanding energy matters identified during the consultation phase have been 
satisfactorily addressed and the application is in accordance with the sustainability policies of 
the London Plan and the intend to publish London Plan. 
Transport  
16 The scheme remains ‘car free’ and this is strongly supported in accordance with Policies 
6.13 of the London Plan and T6 of the intend to publish London Plan. At consultation stage, the 
applicant was required to identify appropriate on-street provision for blue badge parking 
provided for 3% of dwellings at the outset and also to demonstrate potential capacity for 
delivery of spaces for a further 7% of dwellings if required in the future in accordance with 
policy T6 the intend to publish London Plan. A parking stress survey, since submitted by the 
applicant and confirmed with Newham Council Officers, confirms appropriate capacity for the 
provision of blue badge spaces on the surrounding street network. Financial contributions 
towards the provision of on-street blue badge parking spaces by Council, as and when required 