 page 1 
  planning report D&P/3981/01  
20 February 2017 
5 Strand  
in the City of Westminster  
planning application no. 16/10951/FULL 
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 2007; 
Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Demolition of existing building and construction of replacement mixed use building, comprising 
retail (Class A1), restaurant (Class A3), office (Class B1) and residential (Class C3) floorspace 
across two basements, lower ground and ground floors and 11 upper floors, public realm works 
and associated alterations. 
The applicant 
The applicant is BNP Paribas Securities Services Trust Company (Alchemi Group), the 
planning agent is Gerald Eve and the architect is Adjaye Associates. 
Strategic issues summary: 
Land use: mixed use, office led development is supported in the CAZ. (paragraphs 13-14) 
Housing: 26 private market units proposed. £1.04 million contribution to off-site affordable 
housing offered, which falls significantly short of Council policy and the Mayor’s draft SPG 
threshold, and should be increased. (paragraphs 15-20) 
Design and heritage: high quality design and architectural treatment is strongly supported and 
there would be no harm to the setting of heritage assets. (paragraphs 21-28) 
Transport: contributions of £80,000 towards cycle hire docking stations and £30,000 towards 
bus stop upgrades are sought, along with improved facilities for cyclists. (paragraphs 31-35) 
Recommendation 
That the City of Westminster be advised that whilst the application is broadly supported in 
strategic planning terms it does not fully comply with London Plan for the reasons set out in 
paragraph 41 of this report. However, the resolution of those issues could lead to the application 
becoming compliant with the London Plan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 page 2 
Context 
    
1    On 13 January 2017 the Mayor of London received documents from the City of 
Westminster notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance to develop 
the above site for the above uses. Under the provisions of The Town & Country Planning (Mayor of 
London) Order 2008 the Mayor has until 23 February 2017 to provide the Council with a statement 
setting out whether he considers that the application complies with the London Plan, and his 
reasons for taking that view.  The Mayor may also provide other comments.  This report sets out 
information for the Mayor’s use in deciding what decision to make. 
2    The application is referable under Category 1C of the Schedule to the Order 2008:  
Category 1C: “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a building more 
than 30 metres high and outside the City of London.” 
 
3   Once the City of Westminster has resolved to determine the application, it is required to 
refer it back to the Mayor for his decision as to whether to direct refusal; take it over for his own 
determination; or allow the Council to determine it itself, unless otherwise directed.  
4   The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA website 
www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description  
5  The application site occupies a plot on the southern side of the Strand, close to its junction 
with Trafalgar Square, and is approximately 1,200sq.m. in area. The plot is almost entirely occupied 
by an existing 6-9 storey building in office and retail use, built in the 1980s.  
6   The building is detached from its neighbours by two side streets running south east linking 
the Strand to Northumberland Avenue: Craven Street and the narrower Northumberland Street. 
These streets are lined with a mixture of building periods and styles, including terraces of 5-storey 
Grade II listed Georgian townhouses (in commercial and residential use). Adjacent to the site to the 
south west along the Strand is the Grand Buildings – a corner building fronting on to Trafalgar 
Square, which was rebuilt to replicate the previous building with its French pavilion style roof. To 
the north east is an 8 storey office building with a similar design/period as the application 
premises. Further north-east is Charing Cross Station. Opposite the site is the Grade II* listed South 
Africa House. 
7  The site is within the Central Activities Zone (CAZ) and is within the Trafalgar Square 
Conservation Area. It has the highest level of public transport accessibility (PTAL) of 6b, being 
adjacent to Charing Cross main rail terminal and London Underground (LU) station and within 
walking distance of Leicester Square and Embankment LU stations. There are also 23 bus routes 
serving the Strand or close by. The site is accessible to nearby cycle routes; including the East West 
Cycle Superhighway which is located on Victoria Embankment (some 300 metres away) and the 
Covent Garden to Russell Square cycle route which forms part of the Central London Cycle Grid 
(some 700 metres away). Further works are programmed as part of the Central London Grid which 
will improve cycling accessibility locally. The nearest cycle hire docking station is immediately 
adjacent to the site on Craven Street. 
 
 
 page 3 
Details of the proposal 
8      It is proposed to demolish the existing building and redevelop the site to provide a 
replacement building up to 12 storeys in height comprising 8,506sq.m. of office floorspace, 26 
residential units and retail/restaurant uses on the ground floor. 
Case history 
9     In September 2016 a pre-application meeting was held with GLA officers and a report was 
issued on 6 October 2016 (ref: D&P/3981/pre-application). The applicant was advised that the 
land use principles were supported, provided that the scheme made a proportionate contribution 
towards affordable housing. The height and massing of the building was broadly supported, 
although some design modifications were requested.  
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
10   The relevant issues and corresponding policies are as follows:  
 Land use principles London Plan; Central Activities Zone SPG; 
 Housing London Plan; Housing Supplementary Planning Guidance (SPG); 
Housing Strategy; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal 
Recreation SPG; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character and Context 
SPG; London Housing Design Guide; 
 Affordable Housing London Plan; Housing SPG; Housing Strategy, draft Affordable 
Housing and Viability SPG; 
 Urban design and Heritage London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character and Context, 
SPG; Housing SPG; London Housing Design Guide; Shaping 
Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal Recreation SPG; London View 
Management Framework SPG; 
 Access London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Accessible London: 
Achieving an Inclusive Environment SPG; 
 Sustainable development London Plan; Sustainable Design and Construction SPG; Mayor’s 
Climate Change Adaptation Strategy; Mayor’s Climate Change 
Mitigation and Energy Strategy; Mayor’s Water Strategy;  
 Transport London Plan; the Mayor’s Transport Strategy; 
 Crossrail London Plan; Mayoral Community Infrastructure Levy; Crossrail 
SPG 
 
11   For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, the 
development plan in force for the area is the Westminster City Plan (2016), the Westminster 
Unitary Development Plan (saved policies, 2010), and the 2016 London Plan (Consolidated with 
Alterations since 2011).  
12   The following are also relevant material considerations:  
 The Central Activities Zone SPG (2016). 
 The National Planning Policy Framework and Technical Guide to the National Planning 
Policy Framework. 
 National Planning Policy Guidance. 
 
 page 4 
Principle of development and mix of uses 
13     The site is located in the Central Activities Zone (CAZ).  London Plan policies 2.10 and 
4.2 seek to ensure that schemes meet the distinct needs of the central London office market, 
and improve the quality and flexibility of office stock. Policy 2.11 seeks to ensure that 
development proposals to increase office floorspace within CAZ include a mix of uses including 
housing, unless such a mix would demonstrably conflict with other policies in the London Plan. 
14  In this case, the new building would provide replacement office floorspace as well as 
residential and retail uses. The proposals would result in an uplift of office floorspace from 
8,378sq.m. (GEA) to 8,506sq.m, along with the introduction of residential accommodation. The 
mix of proposed uses in the CAZ is in accordance with strategic policy and is therefore 
supported. 
Housing 
15  The proposals will provide 26 residential units with the mix set out in the below table.  
 1 bed 2 bed 3 bed  4 bed total 
market sale 6 7 10 3 26 
 
Affordable housing 
16  London Plan Policy 3.11 requires local planning authorities to seek the maximum amount of 
affordable housing in schemes delivering ten or more units. The Mayor’s draft Affordable Housing 
and Viability SPG establishes a threshold approach to viability, whereby if a scheme is delivering 
35% affordable housing, without public subsidy and in line with the Mayor’s preferred tenure mix, 
then a viability assessment will not be required. 
17 Westminster City Council’s Policy S16 on affordable housing states that the Council will aim 
to exceed 30% of new homes as affordable, and expects all residential developments capable of 
achieving 10 units or more, or over 1,000 sq.m. of additional floorspace, to provide a proportion of 
the floorspace as affordable housing. An interim guidance note on affordable housing policy 
published by the Council in November 2013 (and updated April 2015) sets the affordable housing 
floorspace requirement for sites within the Core CAZ and over 2,500sq.m. at 25%. In accordance 
with the interim guidance note, applicants must seek to provide the required affordable housing on 
site wherever possible. If it can be robustly demonstrated that on-site affordable housing provision 
is not feasible, then off-site provision could be acceptable. A payment in lieu should be provided 
only as a last resort, where it can be demonstrated that neither on-site nor off-site provision is 
feasible or practical.  
18 The applicant is not proposing to provide affordable housing on site or off-site. GLA 
officers recognise that on-site provision would be challenging in this scheme and that off-site 
provision in the vicinity is heavily constrained. Consequently, the applicant is proposing a £1.04 
million payment in lieu. Westminster City Council’s guidance would require a payment in lieu of 
approximately £6,700,000, based on a requirement for this site to deliver 25% affordable housing. 
If the draft SPG threshold of 35% is used, this increases to approximately £11,200,000.  
19 The applicant has provided a viability assessment which concludes that the redevelopment 
proposals cannot support any contribution towards affordable housing. This is due to a number of 
factors, notably the high existing use value arising from the strong rental income of the existing 