 page 1 
  planning report GLA/5087/01  
   3 February 2020 
223 Cambridge Heath Road, Bethnal Green 
in the London Borough of Tower Hamlets  
planning application no.PA/19/02094  
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 
and 2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 
The proposal 
Demolition of the existing building and redevelopment of the site to provide a new 10-
storey building comprising 10,390 sq.m. of office space (10% affordable) alongside 
associated ancillary facilities. 
The applicant 
The applicant is Bethnal Green Regeneration Ltd, and the architects are HKR 
Architects. 
Strategic issues 
Principle of development:  The redevelopment of the site to provide office floorspace 
is acceptable in light of the sites location within an Opportunity Area and the local 
policy framework. The Council must robustly secure the affordable workspace 
provision as part of any future s.106 agreement (paragraphs 11-14).  
Urban design: The proposed design is broadly supported, and the Council is 
encouraged to secure the detailed submission of key facing materials. The applicant 
should seek to improve the appearance and activation of the northern elevation. The 
proposals wold result in less than substantial harm to the Bethnal Green Gardens 
Conservation Area which could be outweighed by the public benefits delivered by the 
scheme (paragraphs 15-24). 
Sustainable development: Further information and justification is required in respect 
of energy and urban greening (paragraphs 25-27). 
Transport: The Council is required to secure conditions/obligations in respect to; a 
delivery and servicing plan, a construction management plan, a travel plan, vehicle 
parking, cycle parking, permit free scheme and healthy streets initiatives. The applicant 
must provide further information in respect to trip generation (paragraphs 28-34). 
Recommendation 
That Tower Hamlets Council be advised that while the application is generally 
acceptable in strategic planning terms the application does not comply with the London 
Plan, for the reasons set out in paragraph 38 of this report; but that the possible 
remedies set out in that same paragraph of this report could address these 
deficiencies. 
 
 page 2 
Context 
 
1 On 30 December 2019 the Mayor of London received documents from Tower 
Hamlets Council notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance 
to develop the above site for the above uses. Under the provisions of The Town & 
Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 the Mayor must provide the Council 
with a statement setting out whether he considers that the application complies with the 
London Plan, and his reasons for taking that view.  The Mayor may also provide other 
comments. This report sets out information for the Mayor’s use in deciding what 
decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under the following Category  of the Schedule to the 
Order 2008: 
•  1C.1(c) “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a building of 
more than 30 metres high and is outside the City of London”. 
3 Once Tower Hamlets Council has resolved to determine the application, it is 
required to refer it back to the Mayor for his decision as to whether to direct refusal; take 
it over for his own determination; or allow the Council to determine it itself. 
4 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA 
website www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
5 The 0.105 hectare site falls on the west side of Cambridge Heath Road within the 
boundary of the City Fringe Opportunity Area. The site was formerly in use for light 
industrial purposes and now houses an artist studio. The site is surrounded by a mix of 
uses including; a student accommodation block to the west, Bethnal Green Gardens to 
the east and a hotel to the south. There are also a range of retail and commercial uses 
fronting Cambridge Heath Road. The site is in close proximity to the Bethnal Green 
Garden conservation area which falls immediately to the east of the plot beyond 
Cambridge Heath Road.   
6 The site is located at the junction of Three Colts Lane and Cambridge Heath 
Road. The nearest section of Transport for London Road Network is Mile End Road, 
located approximately 540 metres to the south of the site. Located on Mile End Road is 
Cycle Superhighway 2 (CS2), which provides a strategic cycle route between Stratford 
and Aldgate. The closest London Underground station to the site is Bethnal Green, 
located 260 metres to the north of the site. Approximately 300 metres to the west of the 
site is Bethnal Green Train Station, which provides access to London Overground 
services. Three bus routes are within close proximity to the site. The site has a Public 
Transport Access Level (PTAL) of 6b (on a scale of 0 to 6b where 6b represents the 
most accessible).    
Details of the proposal 
7 Demolition of the existing building and redevelopment of the site to provide a new 
10-storey building comprising 10,390 sq.m. of office space (10% affordable) alongside 
associated ancillary facilities.  
 page 3 
Case history 
8 A pre-planning application meeting was held between the applicant and the 
Greater London Authority on a similar proposal at the above site. An initial meeting was 
held on 10 April 2019. GLA officers concluded that office-led redevelopment of the site 
could be supported subject to clarification on the sites existing uses. The applicant was 
advised to ensure that any future application addressed concerns in respect to; urban 
design; inclusive access; sustainable development; and, transport.   
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
9 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004, the development plan in force for the area is the 2020 Tower Hamlets Local Plan 
2031: Managing Growth and Sharing Benefits and the 2016 London Plan (Consolidated 
with Alterations).   
10 The following are relevant material considerations:   
• The National Planning Policy Framework and National Planning Practice 
Guidance.  
• The London Plan Intend to Publish version (December 2019). 
• City Fringe opportunity area planning framework. 
• Land use London Plan;  
• Urban design London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character 
and Context SPG;  
• Sustainable development London Plan; Sustainable Design and Construction   
SPG; Mayor’s Environment Strategy; 
• Transport London Plan; the Mayor’s Transport Strategy. 
 
Principle of development  
11 The site is currently occupied by an artists studio. Policy HC5 of the Mayor’s 
intend to publish London Plan seeks the continued growth and evolution of London’s 
diverse cultural facilities and creative industries which it notes should be supported. 
These proposals will result in the loss of this existing creative space. The Council 
should interrogate the engagement with the occupier to determine whether a relocation 
strategy should be secured by Section 106. 
12 London Plan Policy 2.13 identifies the City Fringe/Tech City Opportunity Area as 
having capacity to accommodate a minimum of 53,000 jobs and 15,000 homes. Policy 
SD1 of the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan sets an indicative target of 15,500 
homes and 50,500 jobs for the Opportunity Area. London Plan Policy 4.2 and Policy E1 
of the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan seek improvements to the quality, flexibility 
and adaptability of office space of different sizes stating planning decisions should 
support new office provision, refurbishment and mixed-use development. These policies 
seek to support the provision of office space within appropriate locations with a focus on 
town centres. GLA officers acknowledge that at a local level the 2020 Tower Hamlets 
Local Plan recognises that the world-class economic hub of the City of London will 
expand and opportunities arising from the Tech City and Med City initiatives should be 
maximised. The plan specifically identifies in relation to Cambridge Heath that the area 
 page 4 
will all have a more diverse mix of commercial, cultural, leisure, tourism and night-time 
activities. 
13 The proposals deliver 10,390 sq.m. of office floorspace, 10% of which would be 
affordable. It should be noted that the site is not located within a town centre however it 
is within an Opportunity Area which anticipates an increased level of employment and in 
an area identified in the Local Plan as a suitable location for commercial provision. The 
proposals would result in a significant uplift in the density of employment uses at the 
site, the new office uses would be complimentary to the emerging development within 
Bethnal Green. Given this, the proposal is in conformity with the aspirations of the City 
Fringe/Tech City planning framework, London Plan and the Mayor’s intend to publish 
London Plan.   
14 Policy E3 of the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan identifies that planning 
obligations may be used to secure affordable workspace in the B Use Class, in areas 
including the City Fringe at rents maintained below the market rate for that space for a 
specific social, cultural or economic development. The purpose of this policy (amongst 
others) is to support start-up and early stage business or regeneration. Policy E8 of the 
Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan identifies sector growth opportunities and 
clusters with specific reference to the City Fringe, it states that the Tech City cluster 
should be supported as one of London’s nationally-significant office locations to enable 
entrepreneurs to locate and expand there and to provide the flexibility and range of 
space that this sector needs, including affordable space. Accordingly, the provision of 
1,039 sq.m. (equivalent to 10% of the total offer) of affordable workspace is supported 
in accordance with the policies outlined above. The Council should robustly secure the 
affordable workspace provision within the s.106 agreement.   
Urban design  
Height and massing   
15 London Plan Policies 7.1 and 7.4 and Policies D1 and D2 of the Mayor’s intend to 
publish London Plan require development to have regard to the form, function and 
structure of an area and the scale, mass and orientation of surrounding buildings. The 
proposed building will comprise 10 storeys with the upper to levels being set back from 
the building edge. This recess serves to minimise the massing linear views. GLA 
officers note that the proposed height and massing is in broad conformity with the 
surrounding urban grain. The massing is further broken down through the inclusion of 
chamfered corners on Three Colts Lane. The proposed height and massing strategy is 
supported.  
Layout    
16 The building line along Cambridge Heath Road appropriately follows the 
established urban layout that faces out towards Bethnal Green Gardens. The building’s 
office entrance would be at the corner of the plot which preserves the existing 
arrangement and locates the point of access at a prominent and legible corner chamfer. 
The lobby which provides access to the staff café and upper levels is accessed from 
Cambridge Heath Road. The ‘spill out space’ onto the pavement here is c.5-6 metres 
wide with public realm landscaping, which is supported. The building line along Three 
Colts Lane is tight to the footway (pavement width c.2 metres) within the context of 