 page 1 
   planning report GLA/5347/01  
10 February 2020 
Herringham Quarter, Charlton Riverside  
in the London Borough of Greenwich 
planning application no. 19/3456/F 
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 2007; Town & Country 
Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Hybrid application for up to 1,292 residential units, including 50% affordable. Detailed planning permission sought 
for Phase 1 for 762 residential units and 3,592 sq.m of flexible employment, retail, community and leisure 
floorspace. Outline permission sought for Phases 2 and 3 for up to 530 residential units and up to 3,559 sq.m of 
flexible non-residential floorspace, with appearance, landscaping, layout and scale reserved  
The applicant 
The applicant is Hyde Housing and the architects are fletcher priest architects and Alan Camp Architects 
(Phase 1). 
Strategic issues summary 
• Principle of development: The principle of the mixed-use redevelopment of the site is supported; however, 
significant enhancements to the site’s public transport accessibility as well as pedestrian/cyclists connectivity are 
required to justify the quantum of development proposed and ensure the Mayor’s Good Growth aspirations are 
achieved. In line with the Agent of Change principle, all noise sensitive uses must be designed with regard to the 
existing varied industrial, as well as the emerging, context.  
• Waste sites: Site A and Site D are waste sites, which are safeguarded through the London Plan and Intend to 
Publish London Plan. Compensatory capacity must be identified for these sites before their release is accepted. 
• Commercial uses:  Up to 7,151 sq.m of commercial uses are proposed on the site. The applicant should 
specifically designate the flexible commercial floorspace provision to ensure that these units are suitably designed.  
• Housing: Within the detailed phase, it is proposed to provide 461 affordable units, equating to 64% by habitable 
room, with 15% of units as intermediate and 46% of units as affordable rent. The outline phases would deliver 
sufficient affordable housing to ensure that the scheme as a whole delivers 50% affordable housing. The rental 
levels and income thresholds should be secured within the s106 agreement. For the outline element, an Affordable 
Housing Scheme should be appropriately secured. Further information is also required on playspace, housing mix, 
residential quality and inclusive access.  
• Transport: The Council and TfL are working to establish two new vehicle corridors in the Opportunity Area: an 
east-west route and a riverside route. The east-west route relies on land beyond the Applicant’s redline and, as 
such, an interim bus solution is proposed to serve the development until the through route is available. The 
applicant must engage with TfL and the Council on the road/bus alignment as a priority. Further TfL are working to 
establish a tariff, that all developments in the area will be expected to pay, to pay for the bus route and necessary 
infrastructure. Further work is also required on the pedestrian/cyclist accessibility both within and beyond the site, 
especially given the surrounding industrial context and low PTAL rating. Further information on cycle parking is 
required and car parking should be reduced. 
Recommendation 
That Greenwich Council be advised that the application does not yet fully comply with the London Plan and Intend 
to Publish Plan, for the reasons set out in paragraph 107. However, the resolution of those issues could lead to the 
application becoming compliant with the London Plan and Intend to Publish Plan. 

 page 2 
Context 
1 On 8 November 2019 the Mayor of London acknowledged receipt of documents 
from the Royal Borough of Greenwich notifying him of a planning application of potential 
strategic importance to develop the above site for the above uses. Under the provisions 
of The Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 the Mayor must provide 
the Council with a statement setting out whether he considers that the application 
complies with the London Plan, and his reasons for taking that view. The Mayor may also 
provide other comments. This report sets out information for the Mayor’s use in deciding 
what decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under Category 1A, 1B and 1C of the Schedule to the 
Order 2008:  
• Category 1A: Development which comprises or includes the provision of more than 
150 houses, flats, or houses and flats. 
• Category 1B(c): Development (other than development which only comprises the 
provision of houses, flats or houses and flats) which comprises or includes the 
erection of a building or buildings outside of Central London and with a total 
floorspace of more than 15,000 square metres. 
• Category 1C: Development which comprises or includes the erection of a building 
more than 25 metres high adjacent to the River Thames and Development which 
comprises or includes the erection of a building more than 30 metres high and is 
outside the City of London.  
3 Once the Council has resolved to determine the application, it is required to refer it 
back to the Mayor for his decision, either to direct refusal or to allow the Council to 
determine it itself. 
4 The environmental information for the purposes of the applicable Town and Country 
Planning (Environmental Impact Assessment) Regulations has been taken into account in 
the consideration of this case  
5 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA 
website www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
6 The site comprises four distinct plots, known as Sites A, C, D and E, totalling an area 
of 4.21 hectares and comprised of various land uses: 
• Site A (Maybank Wharf) is broadly square in shape, 1.42 hectares in size and bound 
by Herringham Road to the south and the River Thames to the north. The site is 
presently used as a household and commercial waste site; 
• Site C is 0.69-hecatre in size, rectangular in shape and occupied by a two-storey 
linear building and warehouse, situated on the eastern boundary. It is understood 
that the site is vacant as the previous occupier recently went into administration;  
 page 3 
• Site D is 0.37-hectare in size, predominately covered in hardstanding, with a single-
storey ‘L’ shaped building in the southern corner. The site is currently occupied as a 
waste site for construction and demolition wastes; and 
• Site E is a 0.7-hectare linear site, comprised of single storey warehouses and 
collectively known as the New Lydenburg Commercial Estate, comprising a range of 
occupiers. 
7 A fifth site, Riverside Wharf (referred to as site B), is within the applicant’s ownership 
but does not fall within the redline boundary for this application. The site, which is a 
safeguarded wharf, lies to the immediate east of Site A and fronts the River Thames. No 
works are proposed to the wharf. 
8 In terms of local policy designations, the entire site is within the designated Charlton 
Riverside Strategic Development location and within a flood risk area. The site is also 
allocated within the wider Charlton Riverside area, under CR2, within the emerging Site 
Allocations Document. At a strategic level, the site is within the Charlton Riverside 
Opportunity Area.  
9 The surrounding context is primarily industrial, albeit there are various mixed-use 
schemes coming forward in the area, notably at Flint Glass Wharf to the immediate east of 
the site (LPA ref: 18/0732/F and GLA ref: 4200), which has a planning application pending 
determination, and VIP Trading Estate to the southwest of the site (LPA ref: 16/4008/F and 
GLA ref: 3800), which was subject to a public inquiry in late 2019, with a decision expected 
by the Secretary of State in the early part of 2020.    
10 The site is located approximately 500 metres from the A206 Woolwich Road, 
which forms part of the Strategic Road Network. The nearest part of the Transport for 
London Road Network, the A102 and A205, are located approximately 2 kilometres to the 
west and east of the site respectively.  
11 Charlton station is situated approximately 1.4 kilometres to the south-west, 
providing access to National Rail services to London Bridge, Cannon Street and Dartford, 
and Woolwich Dockyard a similar distance to the southeast. Bus routes 472 and 486 
serve bus stops circa 600 metres from the site (at its closest point), providing direct links 
to Greenwich Peninsula, Plumstead, Thamesmead and Bexleyheath. As the site is 
currently not well served by public transport, with access to national rail stations and 
London Underground or Docklands Light Railway services a considerable distance away, 
the site is primarily served by bus services, which are still some distance from the site. 
The lack of connectivity results in a low Public Transport Accessibility Level (PTAL) score 
for many parts of Charlton Riverside. PTAL is measured on a scale of 0 to 6b where 6b is 
the most accessible, the site records a PTAL of 0 - 2, indicating very poor access to 
public transport services. 
Details of the proposal 
12 Detailed planning permission is sought on Sites A and C for the demolition of the 
existing buildings and structures and the redevelopment of the sites, within buildings of 4 
– 10 storeys, for 762 residential units and 3,592 sq.m of employment, retail, community 
and leisure floorspace (Use classes B1, A1, A2, A3, A4, D1 and D2). The construction of 
a new flood defence wall and associated landscaping and public realm are also 
proposed. 
 page 4 
13 Outline planning permission is sought on Sites D and E, with appearance, 
landscaping, layout and scale reserved, for the development of buildings of between 4 – 
10 storeys to provide 530 residential units and up to 3,559 sq.m of flexible employment, 
retail, community and leisure uses (Use classes B1, A1, A2, A3, A4, D1 and D2). 
 
Figure 1 – Site Plan, with black line around the detailed element of Sites A and C. 
Case history 
14 GLA Officers provided initial pre-application advice on the current proposals on 5 
February 2019 (GLA ref: GLA/5004). GLA officers advised that the principle of the 
redevelopment was supported, in accordance with the managed, masterplan-led release 
of surplus industrial land that is set out within the Intend to Publish London Plan. It was, 
however, noted that any support was contingent upon enhancing the site’s accessibility, 
retaining and safeguarding the wharf, relocating the existing waste sites and enhancing 
the affordable housing offer, as well as addressing the issues within that report with 
regard to principle of development, housing, urban design, inclusive access and 
transport. 
15 Further pre-application meetings were held on 7 May 2019 and 3 September 2019 
to discuss the scheme. GLA officers reiterated the points raised at the earlier pre-
application meeting and provided further guidance on the two existing waste sites.     
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
16 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004, the development plan in force for the area is the Royal Greenwich Local Plan: Core 
Strategy with detailed policies (2014) and the Policies Map (2014), and the London Plan 