 page 1 
   
 
planning report GLA/5391/01  
10 February 2020 
587-595, High Road, Seven Kings, Ilford 
in the London Borough of Redbridge  
planning application no. 4417/19 
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral  
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 
2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Demolition of existing buildings and erection of a 10-storey building comprising of 50 flats and 
ground floor commercial floorspace. 
The applicant 
The applicant is The Parham Finance Co. Ltd and the architect is Ackroyd Lowrie.  
Strategic issues summary 
Principle of development: The proposed residential-led redevelopment of the locally 
designated Mixed-Use Opportunity site is supported in strategic terms, subject to satisfying the 
Council’s recommendation for replacement employment floorspace and demonstrating 
compliance with agent of change principles (paragraphs 13-15). 
Affordable housing: The quantum (15%) and mono-tenure nature of the proposed affordable 
housing is wholly unacceptable. GLA officers will seek improvement to the quantum and 
affordability of the affordable housing and will robustly interrogate the financial viability 
assessment to ensure that the maximum amount of affordable housing, with an appropriate 
affordable tenure mix, is secured (paragraphs 17-22).  
Urban and inclusive design: No harm would be caused to nearby Grade II listed Former 
Cauliflower Hotel. Further work relating to improving the scheme’s residential quality is required 
(paragraphs 23-31). 
Environment: Further information on the energy strategy is required. (paragraphs 32-35). 
Transport: Subject to the requested conditions, Healthy Streets (cycling) improvement and 
submission of an acceptably detailed cycle parking design plan, the proposals are acceptable in 
strategic terms (paragraphs 36-41).  
Recommendation 
That Redbridge Council be advised that the application does not fully comply with the London 
Plan and the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan for the reasons set out in paragraph 45 of 
this report. However, the resolution of these issues could lead to the application becoming 
compliant with the London Plan and the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan. 
 
 
 

 page 2 
Context 
1 On 17 December 2019, the Mayor of London received documents from 
Redbridge Council notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic 
importance to develop the above site for the above uses. Under the provisions of The 
Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 the Mayor must provide the 
Council with a statement setting out whether he considers that the application complies 
with the London Plan and draft London Plan, and his reasons for taking that view. The 
Mayor may also provide other comments. This report sets out information for the 
Mayor’s use in deciding what decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under Category 1C of the Mayor of London Order 
2008: 
• Category 1C: “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a 
building of (c) more than 30 metres high and is outside the City of London.” 
3 Once Redbridge Council has resolved to determine the application, it is required 
to refer it back to the Mayor for his decision as to whether to direct refusal; take it over 
for his own determination; or allow the Council to determine it itself. 
4 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA 
website www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
5 The application site is approximately 0.06 hectares and is located at 587-595 
High Road, Seven Kings, Ilford. The site is bounded to the north by the Great Eastern 
Main Line, to the west by a Halfords Autocentre and to the east by a car showroom. It 
was previously occupied by a petrol station but has been used as a mixed car valet 
centre and car wash for the last 10 years. 
6 The site, along with numbers 573-585, 597-601 and 603 High Road, is within the 
designated Mixed Use Opportunity Site (No. 81) in the Local Plan. It is not within a 
conservation area and there are no listed heritage assets on the site; however, the 
Grade II listed Former Cauliflower Hotel is approximately 150 metres to the west of the 
site. 
7 The site is accessed from High Road (A118), which is part of the Strategic Road 
Network. The North Circular (A406), the nearest part of the Transport for London Road 
Network, is over 1 kilometre away. Seven Kings rail station is 350 metres to the east 
and is currently served by TfL Rail, with the Elizabeth Line (Crossrail) expected in the 
future. One bus route (86/N86) has stops within 150 metres on High Road and three 
day-time services stop on Green Lane about 500 metres away—routes 128,150 and 
679. Consequently, the site has a public transport accessibility level (PTAL) of 3, on a 
scale of 0-6b where 6b is the highest.  
 
 
 
 page 3 
Details of the proposal 
8 The applicant proposes to demolish the existing buildings and redevelop the site 
to provide a residential-led mixed-use development, involving the erection of a 10-storey 
building, comprising: 50 new residential units; 92 sq.m. of business/community use 
floorspace; 86 residential cycle parking spaces and 3 Sheffield stands for larger bicycles 
and visitors; and, associated amenity spaces. 
Case history 
9 There is no relevant strategic planning history for this site. 
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
10 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004, the development plan in force for the area is Redbridge’s Local Plan (March 
2018), and the London Plan 2016 (Consolidated with Alterations since 2011).  
11 The relevant issues and corresponding policies are as follows: 
• Principle of  London Plan; 
      development 
• Employment land London Plan; Land for Industry and Transport SPG; 
• Housing London Plan; Housing SPG; Housing Strategy; Shaping 
Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal Recreation SPG; 
Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character and Context SPG;  
• Affordable housing London Plan; Housing SPG; Housing Strategy; Mayor’s 
Affordable Housing and Viability SPG; 
• Urban design London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character and 
Context SPG; Housing SPG; Shaping Neighbourhoods: 
Play and Informal Recreation SPG; 
• Inclusive design London Plan; Accessible London: Achieving an Inclusive 
Environment SPG; 
• Environment London Plan; Sustainable Design and Construction SPG; 
Mayor’s Environment Strategy;  
• Transport London Plan; Mayor’s Transport Strategy. 
12 The following are relevant material considerations: 
• The National Planning Policy Framework and National Planning Practice 
Guidance; and,  
• The London Plan - intend to publish version (December 2019), which should 
be considered on the basis described in the NPPF. 
Principle of development  
13 The site is non-designated employment land in a former industrial use. Policy 
E7C of the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan sets out the below scenarios where 
mixed-use or residential developments on non-designated industrial sites should be 
supported: 
 page 4 
• there is no reasonable prospect of the site being used for the industrial and 
related purposes set out in Part A of Policy E4 Land for industry, logistics and 
services to support London’s economic function; or, 
• it has been allocated in an adopted local development plan document for 
residential or mixed-use development; or, 
•  industrial, storage or distribution floorspace is provided as part of mixed-use 
intensification. 
14 The application site forms part of Opportunity Site 81 in the Redbridge Local 
Plan, which is allocated for residential/employment use. The proposal would deliver a 
residential-led mixed use development, comprised of new homes and office or social 
infrastructure, which broadly accords with the local development plan’s site allocation. 
The redevelopment of this site for the intended land uses is therefore considered 
appropriate in this instance, in line with Policy E7C of the Mayor’s intend to publish 
London Plan. 
15 Notwithstanding this, the applicant must satisfy the Council’s recommendation for 
replacement employment floorspace and demonstrate that the industrial and related 
activities in the surrounding area would not be compromised in terms of their continued 
efficient functioning in line with Policies D13 and E7 of the Mayor’s intend to publish 
London Plan. Issues in relation to fire safety, access and servicing, design quality, 
noise, vibration and air quality must be fully assessed and robust mitigation measures 
specified, where necessary, to ensure that industrial and residential uses co-exist. 
Housing 
16 London Plan Policy 3.3 and Policy H1 of the Mayor’s intend to publish London 
Plan in seeking to increase the supply of housing in London, set borough housing 
targets. The Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan sets a target of 14,090 new homes 
for the period 2019 to 2028 in Table 4.1 for the London Borough of Redbridge. The 
scheme would deliver 50 new homes, which would contribute to this target and is 
supported in principle. The proposed housing mix is set out below: 
tenure 1-Bed 2-Bed total 
units 
total 
hr 
hr % 
private 32 11 43 97 85% 
shared ownership 4 3 7 17 15% 
total 36 14 50 114 100% 
Affordable housing 
17 London Plan Policies 3.11 and 3.12 and Policy H4 of the Mayor’s intend to 
publish London Plan seek to maximise the delivery of affordable housing, with the 
Mayor setting a strategic target of 50%. Policy H6 of the Mayor’s intend to publish 
London Plan provides a flexibly prescribed tenure mix of: 30% social rent/London 
Affordable Rent; 30% intermediate products; and, 40% to be determined by the relevant 
borough as low cost rented homes or intermediate products. Locally, the Redbridge 
Local Plan expects at least 35% affordable housing provision on this site.  