 
 page 1 
   
planning report GLA/4965/01  
24 February 2020 
Bow River Village Phase 3, 1-4 Hancock Road    
In the London Borough of Tower Hamlets (LLDC)  
planning application no. 19/00477/FUL 
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral  
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 
2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Demolition of all existing structures and redevelopment of the site to provide: 435 dwellings; 
2,750 sq.m. of flexible commercial space; 901 sq.m. of flexible commercial/community 
floorspace; and 106 sq.m. flexible retail, in buildings ranging up to 26 storeys together with 
ancillary management and residents’ facilities, plant and refuse storage areas, car and cycle 
parking, public realm and other associated works. 
The applicant 
The applicant is Southern Housing Group and the architect is Karakusevic Carson 
Architects. 
Strategic issues summary 
Principle of development: The residential-led mixed use scheme within the Olympic Legacy 
Opportunity Area is strongly supported (paragraphs 14-16). 
Affordable housing: 50% by habitable room, with a 51%:49% affordable rent-intermediate 
tenure mix, is strongly supported and would qualify for the Fast Track Route subject to LLDC’s 
approval of the tenure mix (paragraphs 18-22). 
Heritage and urban design: The principle of tall buildings and high density development is 
supported taking into account the opportunity area location, the existing and emerging context 
of tall buildings, high residential quality and less than substantial harm to a heritage asset, 
which would be outweighed by the expected public benefits. However, the scheme would 
benefit from variation in heights, which should be explored further. (paragraphs 23-36). 
Environment: Further information is required on the energy strategy and the SuDS measures 
revised as recommended (paragraphs 37-42). 
Transport: The submission of Stage 1 Road Safety Audit, confirmation of TfL Structures 
approval and the securing of various transport-related plans via planning conditions or the 
S106 are required (paragraphs 43-49).  
Recommendation 
That London Legacy Development Corporation be advised that whilst the principle of 
development is supported the application does not yet fully comply with the London Plan and 
Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan for the reasons set out in paragraph 53 of this report. 
However, the resolution of these issues could lead to the application becoming compliant with 
the London Plan and Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan. 

 
 page 2 
Context 
1 On 14 January 2020, the Mayor of London received documents from London 
Legacy Development Corporation notifying him of a planning application of potential 
strategic importance to develop the above site for the above uses. Under the provisions 
of The Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 the Mayor has until 24 
February 2020 to provide the Corporation with a statement setting out whether he 
considers that the application complies with the London Plan and draft London Plan, 
and his reasons for taking that view. The Mayor may also provide other comments. This 
report sets out information for the Mayor’s use in deciding what decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under Categories 1A, 1B and 1C of the Mayor of 
London Order 2008: 
• Category 1A: “Development which comprises or includes the provision of 
more than 150 houses, flats, or houses and flats.” 
• Category 1B: “Development (other than development which only comprises 
the provision of houses, flats, or houses and flats) which comprises or includes 
the erection of a building or buildings—(c) outside Central London and with a 
total floorspace of more than 15,000 square metres.” 
• Category 1C: “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a 
building of (c) more than 30 metres high and is outside the City of London.” 
3 Once London Legacy Development Corporation has resolved to determine the 
application, it is required to refer it back to the Mayor for his decision as to whether to 
direct refusal or allow the Corporation to determine it itself. 
4 The environmental information for the purposes of the Town and Country 
Planning (Environmental Impact Assessment) Regulations 2011 has been taken into 
account in the consideration of this case.  
5 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA 
website www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
6 The application site is approximately 1.05 hectares in size and is bounded by the 
A12 to the west, the River Lea to the north and east and to the south by a mixed-use 
development referred to as Bow River Village Phase 2. The site is within the Southern 
Olympic Fringe sub-area of the Olympic Legacy Supplementary Planning Guidance 
(OLSPG) and is designated as an ‘Area of Change’. It also forms part of Site Allocation 
SA4.1 Bromley-by-Bow in the LLDC Local Plan, which is detailed in the Bromley by Bow 
SPD. Ideal Furniture, which is a furniture manufacturer and importer, and Calor Gas 
distribution are currently operating on the site; however, it is not designated industrial 
land.  
7 The site does not lie within a conservation area nor does it contain any listed 
buildings; however, it is located near to Three Mills Conservation Area (with its cluster of 
listed buildings) and Sugar House Land Conservation Area. The Grade I Listed Tide Mill 
(also known as House Mill) and the Grade II listed Offices Opposite Clock Mill and the 
Clock Mill are listed assets within the Three Mills Conservation Area. In addition, there 
 
 page 3 
are listed assets on Bow Road to the north west of the site, including the Grade II* listed 
Church of St. Mary Stratford Bow. 
8 The A12 forms part of the Transport for London Road Network (TLRN) and the 
nearest part of the Strategic Road Network (SRN) is Stratford High Street to the north of 
the site. Cycle Superhighway 2 runs west-east on Stratford High Street. Bromley-by-
Bow London Underground station is approximately 500 metres to the south on the 
western side of the A12 and provides access to London Underground services on the 
District and Hammersmith & City lines. Bow Docklands Light Railway station is 
approximately 600 metres to the west of the site. There are four bus services available 
within 400 metres. It is estimated that the site records a public transport accessibility 
level (PTAL) of 5 to 6a, on a scale of 0-6 where 6 is excellent. 
Details of the proposal 
9 Southern Housing—a registered social housing provider and GLA Strategic 
Partner—proposes to redevelop the site to provide a residential-led development, 
involving the erection of 3 buildings ranging in height from 2 to 26 storeys, comprising:  
• 435 new residential units; 
• 2,750 sq.m. of flexible B1 floorspace; 
• 901 sq.m. of flexible floorspace (B1/D1); 
• 106 sq.m. flexible retail floorspace; 
• car and cycle parking; and, 
• associated public realm and highway improvements. 
Case history 
10 The site formed part of the outline component of a hybrid planning application, 
GLA reference number PDU/2861/ (LPA ref. PA/11/02423) for 741 residential units (219 
detailed and 522 in outline) and 10,527 sq.m. commercial floorspace, which was 
granted planning permission in September 2012 with 35% affordable housing. This 
phase of the scheme was identified to deliver 133 units and a car showroom. A 
reserved matters application was submitted in July 2016, and approved, for the delivery 
of 112 units in what is referred to as Phase 2. The detailed element (Phase 1) has been 
completed and Phase 2 is under construction. The timescales for the submission of 
reserved matters applications to deliver further elements of the outline permission have 
expired.  
11 More recently, GLA officers provided pre-application advice on this scheme on 8 
January 2019, covering strategic issues with respect to: principle of development, urban 
design, housing, affordable housing, inclusive access, sustainable development/climate 
change and transport. The pre-application advice note issued by the GLA indicated 
officers’ support in strategic planning terms. Given the strategic priority for the retention 
of London’s industrial capacity and provision of affordable workspace and low-cost 
office space, the exploration of opportunities to provide these types of commercial 
floorspace was encouraged by GLA officers. Additionally, any future planning 
application needed to address the issues raised in relation to urban design, inclusive 
access, children’s play space, sustainable development/climate change mitigation and 
transportation. 
 
 page 4 
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
8 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004, the development plan in force for the area comprises the London Legacy 
Development Corporation Local Plan (2015-2031) and, the London Plan 2016 
(Consolidated with Alterations since 2011). 
12 The relevant issues and corresponding policies are as follows: 
• Opportunity Areas London Plan; Olympic Legacy SPG; 
• Employment land London Plan; Land for Industry and Transport SPG; 
• Housing/Affordable London Plan; Housing SPG; Housing Strategy; Shaping 
      housing Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal Recreation SPG; 
Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character and Context SPG; 
Affordable Housing and Viability SPG; 
• Urban design London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character      
and Context SPG; Housing SPG; Shaping 
Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal Recreation SPG; 
• Heritage London Plan; 
• Inclusive design London Plan; Accessible London: Achieving an Inclusive 
Environment SPG; 
• Environment London Plan; Sustainable Design and Construction SPG; 
Mayor’s Environment Strategy; 
• Transport London Plan; Mayor’s Transport Strategy. 
  
13 The following are relevant material considerations: 
• the National Planning Policy Framework and National Planning Practice 
Guidance; 
• The London Plan – Intend to publish version (December 2019), which 
should be considered on the basis explained in the NPPF; and, 
• Bromley-By-Bow SPD (2017). 
Principle of development  
14 The London Plan and the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan both identify the 
optimisation of land as a key part of the strategy for delivering additional homes in 
London. London Plan Policy 2.13 and Policy SD1 of the Mayor’s intend to publish 
London Plan identify Opportunity Areas as one of the focal points for intensification. The 
application site falls within the Olympic Legacy Opportunity Area, which is identified in 
the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan as having an indicative employment capacity 
of 65,000 jobs and a minimum of 39,000 new homes.  
15 The site is also non-designated industrial land. Policy E7C of the Mayor’s intend 
to publish London Plan sets out the below scenarios where mixed-use or residential 
developments on non-designated industrial sites should be supported: 