 page 1 
 
 planning report GLA/4305/02  
17 February 2020 
49-87 New Road, Rainham  
in the London Borough of Havering  
planning application no. P0947.17 
  
Strategic planning application stage II referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 2007; Town & Country 
Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Outline planning application for the demolition of all buildings and redevelopment of the site for residential use 
providing up to 259 units with ancillary car parking, landscaping and access 
The applicant 
The applicant is a JV between London Borough of Havering & Notting Hill Genesis and the architect is Bell 
Philips.   
Key dates 
Stage 1 considered: 29 August 2017 
Havering Council Planning Committee: 7 November 2019 
Strategic issues 
Principle of development: The site forms part of a wider masterplan brought forward by the JV, comprised of 9 
sites along New Road, of which two are referable to the Mayor. The principle of the proposed mixed-use 
redevelopment of the site remains strongly supported, in accordance with the London Plan and Intend to Publish 
London Plan.  
Affordable housing: The application proposes 35% affordable housing across their masterplan of sites, comprised 
of 60% intermediate and 40% London Affordable Rent (LAR). As the site is presently in industrial use, the threshold 
level for the Fast Track route is 50% affordable housing. The applicant has provided a financial viability assessment, 
which assesses the viability of the site itself as well as the 9 other sites within the JV’s masterplan. GLA officers 
have confirmed that 35% is the maximum level that the Masterplan could provide. The exact tenure breakdown 
would be provided in a subsequent reserved matters application or planning obligation; however, a minimum of 40% 
LAR is secured.  
Urban design: The primary urban design issue at consultation stage related to the impact of the significant quantum 
of car parking. The application has since has been revised to reduce the number of car parking spaces from 0.74 
spaces per unit to 0.34 spaces per unit, which improves the public realm and setting of the buildings. Parameter 
plans, securing height, building footprint, land uses and access have been secured.  All matters are reserved, with 
detailed design to follow in a reserved matters application. 
Matters relating to energy and transport have also been addressed. 
The Council’s decision 
Havering Council has resolved to grant planning permission subject to conditions. 
Recommendations 
Havering Council be advised that the Mayor is content for the borough to determine the case themselves, subject to 
any action that the Secretary of State may take, and does not therefore wish to direct refusal, or that he is to be the 
local planning authority.  
 
 
 page 2 
Context 
1 On 3 July 2017 the Mayor of London received documents from Havering Council 
notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance to develop the 
above site for the above uses.  
 
2 The application is referable under Category 1A of the Schedule to the Order 
2008:  
• Category 1A: Development which comprises or includes the provision of more 
than 150 houses, flats, or houses and flats.  
3 On 29 August 2017, the Deputy Mayor for Planning, Regeneration & Skills 
(hereafter “the Deputy Mayor”) considered planning report D&P/4305/01, and 
subsequently advised Havering Council that the application did not comply with the 
London Plan, but that the possible remedies set out in paragraph 38 of that report 
could address these deficiencies.  
4 A copy of the above-mentioned report is attached. The essentials of the case 
with regard to the proposal, the site, case history, strategic planning issues and relevant 
policies and guidance are as set out therein, unless otherwise stated in this report.  
5 On 15 October 2019, Havering Council resolved to grant planning permission, in 
accordance with officer’s recommendation. On 10 February 2020 Havering Council 
advised the Mayor of their decision. Under the provisions of Article 5 of the Town & 
Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008, the Mayor may allow the draft 
decision to proceed unchanged, direct the Council to refuse planning permission under 
Article 6, or issue a direction, under Section 2A of the Town and Country Planning Act 
1990 in accordance with Article 7 of the 2008 Order, that he is to act as the local 
planning authority for the purpose of determining the application and any connected 
application. The Mayor has until 24 February 2020 to notify the Council of his decision 
and to issue any direction. 
6 The Mayor’s decision on this case, and the reasons, will be made available on 
the GLA’s website www.london.gov.uk.   
Consultation stage issues summary 
7 At the consultation stage, Havering Council were advised that, whilst the 
application was broadly supported in strategic planning terms, it did not comply with 
the London Plan for the following reasons:  
• Affordable housing: a multi-site approach is proposed across nine sites along 
the New Road in partnership with a Registered Provider and there is an 
aspiration to deliver 35% affordable housing. The applicant must commit to a 
comprehensive affordable housing strategy across the programme, which must 
secure the timely delivery of the maximum amount of affordable housing. This 
strategy will be subject to robust scrutiny by GLA and Council officers. Further 
discussions are required to agree an appropriate mechanism to secure overall 
delivery across the sites. The use of grant should be explored and modelled to 
increase the offer. Early implementation and late stage review mechanisms 
should be secured, in order to ensure compliance with London Plan Policy 3.12 
and the Mayor’s Affordable Housing and Viability SPG. 
 page 3 
• Urban design: there are concerns with the design, appearance and residential 
quality of the scheme, arising from the excessive surface car parking and poor 
definition of public and private space and routes. The applicant should reduce car 
parking and improve the quality of the spaces between the buildings, to ensure 
compliance with London Plan Policies 7.1, 7.3 and 7.4. 
• Climate change: the energy strategy does not fully accord with London Plan 
Policies 5.2 and 5.9. Further information regarding energy efficiency, the site-
wide network and renewable energy is required. The final agreed energy strategy 
should be appropriately secured by the Council, along with contributions towards 
off-site mitigation. 
• Transport: in order to comply with London Plan Policies 6.3, 6.7, 6.9, 6.10, 
6.13 and 6.14, the applicant should address concerns over the trip generation 
analysis and potential impact on bus services. Parking provision should be 
reduced to promote sustainable transport modes and cycle parking increased. 
Public realm improvements, a travel plan, delivery and servicing plan and 
construction logistics plan should also be secured. 
 
Mayoral policy update 
8 Since the stage 1 response was issued in August 2017, the Mayor’s draft London 
Plan has been published. This was first published for Regulation 17 consultation in 
December 2017 and an Examination in Public held in 2019. On 17 December 2019, the 
Mayor published the Intend to Publish version and issued this to the Secretary of State. 
The Intend to Publish Plan is the latest version of the plan.  
Proposed development update 
9 Since the consultation response was issued, the applicant has revised the 
scheme to increase the number of residential units to 259 units (an increase of 52 units) 
in buildings of 6 – 7 storeys. The GLA have engaged with the applicant, the Council and 
TfL to discuss the proposed amendments as well as address issues outstanding from 
consultation stage. These are discussed further below. 
Principle of development 
10 As set out at Stage 1, the principle of the proposed mixed-use redevelopment of 
the site was strongly supported, in accordance with the London Plan. The Intend to 
Publish London Plan also promotes the regeneration of Opportunity Areas and 
particularly the use of brownfield land, whist Policies E4 and E7 support the release and 
redevelopment of industrial land for other uses where this has been released through a 
plan-led approach Therefore, the principle of development remains strongly supported. 
It is also relevant to note that since the consultation response was issued, the Deputy 
Mayor for Planning, Regeneration and Skills granted planning permission for the Beam 
Park development site, directly opposite the site, for up to 3,000 homes, non-residential 
uses and a new railway station. The railway station and commercial uses within that site 
will serve the residential units on the adjacent sites, including this site. 
11 The JV currently has no interest in the site, meaning it is not possible for the JV 
partners to sign up to a legal agreement. The Planning Practice Guidance notes that a 
negatively-worded condition, limiting the development that can take place until a 
planning obligation or other agreements have been agreed, is unlikely to be appropriate 
 page 4 
in the majority of cases; however, it notes that in exceptional circumstances it may be 
appropriate. In this instance, it is considered appropriate, given that it is not possible to 
enter into a legal agreement and without the condition, requiring a legal agreement to 
be entered into, the scheme would not offset any of its impacts or suitably secure any of 
its benefits. 
12 As such, a condition has been secured, which requires a legal agreement to be 
entered into prior to the commencement of development in a format substantially the 
same as the draft s106 agreement appended to the decision notice. When the scheme 
was presented to Havering Committee, the planning obligations were secured via a 
condition, without reference to a s106 agreement. The GLA have now secured a draft 
s106 agreement, which will be appended to the decision notice and will provide 
additional certainty that the affordable products will comply with the relevant Mayoral 
policy and to ensure that the early and late stage review comply with the Mayor’s 
Affordable Housing & Viability SPG.  
Housing 
13 GLA officers noted that the scheme should seek to maximise residential densities 
on the site. The Intend to Publish London Plan now promotes a design-led approach to 
densities and removed the prescriptive density matrix. Notwithstanding the policy 
change, the comments with regard to optimising the site’s density remain relevant. It is 
considered that the amendments to the scheme to provide 53 additional residential units 
(and a total of 259 residential units) ensure that the development responds to its varied 
context, which includes Beam Park development, extending to 16 stories with new 
station to the south, and the detached bungalows and two storey terraced houses to the 
north.  
14 The scheme proposes 35% affordable housing across their masterplan, 
comprised of 40% London Affordable Rent and 60% intermediate rent. The homes will 
be delivered across the Masterplan so that the cumulative total of affordable homes 
does not fall below 35%. The exact tenure breakdown would be provided in a 
subsequent reserved matters applications; however, the draft decision notice secures a 
minimum of 40% LAR across Notting Hill’s sites. Given that the applicant is using 
Housing Zone funding and is a Programme Partner of the GLA, the flexibility is 
acceptable to GLA officers, as it enables the applicant to respond to local context and 
demand, albeit securing a minimum affordable rental provision, when developing the 
affordable offer. Table 1 an indicative phasing of the delivery of these sites, whilst figure 
1 maps these along New Road. 
15 As the site would be in public ownership once acquired and that the existing use 
is industrial, the threshold level for the Fast Track route is 50% affordable housing. The 
applicant has provided a financial viability assessment (FVA) for the 9 sites that 
comprise the JV programme (of which 2 are referable) as well as an FVA for the site 
itself. GLA officers have interrogated the viability assessment and confirm that, whilst 
not all inputs into the appraisals are agreed, 35% is the maximum reasonable level of 
affordable housing. Early and late stage reviews have also been secured through the 
obligation condition. 
 
 