1 
 
planning report GLA/4664/02 
  17 February 2020 
Crown House and Linton Road Car Park, Barking 
in the London Borough of Barking and Dagenham 
planning application no. 18/01972/FUL 
Strategic planning application stage II referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 
2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Demolition of existing Crown House building and phased redevelopment of the site to 
provide 396 residential units and 430 sqm of flexible commercial floorspace (facilitating 
A1, A2, A3, B1, D1 and D2 uses) within two buildings (a part 9, 10, 16, 20 storey 
building and a part 10, 25, 29 storey building), associated highway works, servicing 
facilities, cycle parking, disabled car parking and public realm improvements.   
The applicant 
The applicant is Lightquote Ltd and the London Borough of Barking & Dagenham 
and the architect is Carey Jones Chapman Tolcher. 
Key dates 
Stage I report: 28 January 2019 
Committee meeting: 18 March 2019 
Strategic issues 
 
Principle of development: The residential-led redevelopment of the site within the London 
Riverside Opportunity Area is strongly supported. 
Affordable Housing: 43% affordable housing is compliant with the Fast Track Route (blended 
threshold), and an early stage review has been secured in the s106 agreement. 
Urban design and heritage: The proposals are of a high design quality with good residential 
quality. The proposal would cause less than substantial harm to the significance of the Abbey 
and Barking Town Conservation Area. The public benefits of the scheme, principally affordable 
housing, outweighs the identified harm  
Issues relating to Environment, Inclusive Design, Flood Risk and Transport resolved 
and relevant conditions and Section 106 obligations secured. 
The Council’s decision 
In this instance, Barking and Dagenham Council has resolved to grant permission, subject to 
conditions and a section 106 agreement. 
Recommendation 
 
2 
 
That Barking and Dagenham Council be advised that the Mayor is content for it to determine 
the case itself, subject to any action that the Secretary of State may take and does not 
therefore wish to direct that he is to be the local planning authority.  
 
Context 
1   On 20 November 2018, the Mayor of London received documents from Barking 
and Dagenham Council notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic 
importance to develop the above site for the above uses. This was referred to the Mayor 
under Categories 1A, 1B and 1C(c)  of the Schedule to the Order 2008:  
• 1A.1 “Development which comprises or includes the provision of more than 150 
houses, flats, or houses and flats.”  
• 1B.1(c) “Development (other than development which only comprises the 
provision of houses, flats, or houses and flats) which comprises or includes the 
erection of a building or buildings outside Central London and with a total 
floorspace of more than 15,000 square metres.”    
• 1C.1(c) “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a building 
more than 30 metres high and is outside the City of London.”  
2   On 28 January 2019, the Mayor considered planning report GLA/4664/01, and 
subsequently advised Barking and Dagenham Council that the application did not fully 
comply with the London Plan and the draft London Plan; however, the possible 
remedies set out in paragraph 99 of the above-mentioned report could address these 
deficiencies. 
3    A copy of the above-mentioned report is attached. The essentials of the case 
with regard to the proposal, the site, case history, strategic planning issues and relevant 
policies and guidance are as set out therein, unless otherwise stated in this report. 
Since then, further information has been provided in response to the Mayor’s concerns 
(see below). On 18 March 2019, Barking and Dagenham Council decided that it was 
minded to grant permission, and following the drafting of the section 106 agreement, on 
4 February 2020 the Council advised the Mayor of this resolution. Under the provisions 
of Article 5 of the Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008, the Mayor 
may allow the draft decision to proceed unchanged or issue a direction under Article 7 
that he is to act as the local planning authority for the purpose of determining the 
application. The Mayor has until 18 February 2020 to notify the Council of his decision 
and to issue any direction. The Mayor’s decision on this case, and the reasons, will be 
made available on the GLA’s website www.london.gov.uk. 
Consultation stage issues summary 
4   At consultation stage, Barking and Dagenham Council was advised that the 
application did not yet fully comply with the London Plan and the draft London Plan, with 
the strategic issues set out below: 
• Land use: The principle of the residential-led use of on the site is supported.  
 
• Affordable housing: Additional information should be submitted to 
demonstrate that the blended threshold of 42% affordable housing by 
3 
 
habitable room for the site as a whole (Building A and B) is reached without 
the inclusion of public subsidy, in order for the scheme to be eligible for the 
Fast Track Route. If public subsidy is being used to support this offer, then the 
scheme must follow the viability tested route, and viability information must be 
submitted, which will be robustly scrutinised by GLA officers. Early stage and 
(if the viability tested route is followed), late stage viability reviews must be 
applied. 
 
• Urban design and heritage: The overall approach generally supported, some 
addition information is requested regarding the site tying in with the emerging 
context; on balance the residential quality is acceptable subject to further 
clarification on daylight penetration and further justification for single aspect 
units need addressing.  
 
• Inclusive design: The layout of the 1 bedroom 2 person accessible units in 
Building A (affordable) needs to be reviewed.  
 
• Transport: Car-free supported but insufficient number of blue badge parking 
spaces for building A; s106 contribution required for pedestrian and cycling 
improvements; impact on Barking station needs to be established and the best 
planning and financial mitigation measures to be agreed and resolved prior to 
Stage II referral to the Mayor; bus stop accessibility audit should be completed; 
CLP, DSP and TP required.  
• Flood risk, drainage, and water: The approach to flood risk management is 
compliant. The surface water drainage strategy does not give appropriate regard 
to the drainage hierarchy and greenfield runoff rate. Additional SuDS 
maintenance information required. Water harvesting and reuse should be 
integrated with the surface water drainage system to provide a dual benefit. 
• Climate change: Approach is generally supported. Some additional 
information is required. S106 agreement will be required for district heat 
network connection. Single energy centre and network required for each 
building.  
 
Application update 
5    Since consultation stage, GLA officers have engaged in discussions with the 
applicant, the Council and TfL officers with a view to addressing the above matters. 
Furthermore, as part of the Barking and Dagenham’s draft decision on the case, various 
planning conditions and obligations have been secured. An update against the issues 
raised at consultation stage is set out below. 
6  Following the committee decision on 18 March 2019, further amendments to the 
elevations of the scheme were submitted to Barking and Dagenham Council. These 
amendments have been considered and a recommendation to approve under delegated 
authority, subject to any direction the Mayor may issue, has been submitted. 
7  Since consultation stage, the Government published the revised National 
Planning Policy Framework in February 2019 and the Mayor published The London 
Plan Intend to Publish Version (December 2019),which must be taken into account on 
the basis explained within the NPPF. 
4 
 
 
 
 
Principle of development 
8    As at consultation stage, the principle of a residential development delivering 396 
new homes, of which the 227 dwellings would be Build to Rent housing, within the 
London Riverside Opportunity Area and the Barking Town Centre Housing Zone 
remains strongly supported in accordance with Policies 2.13 and 3.3 of the London 
Plan, as well as Policies SD1 and H1 of the intend to publish London Plan 
Affordable Housing 
9 At consultation stage, it was established that as the proposed development is 
coming forward on both public and private land, a blended approach to establish the 
affordable housing threshold to meet the Fast Track Route is appropriate. The blended 
threshold in this case was established to be 42%. 
10 The proposed development provides 43% affordable housing by habitable room 
as set out in the table below: 
Unit 
type 
Market  
Housing 
(BtR) 
Discount 
Market Rent 
London 
Living Rent 
Intermediate 
(shared 
ownership) 
Total  
Unit Hab 
room 
Unit Hab 
room 
Unit Hab 
room 
Unit Hab 
room 
Unit Hab 
room 
unit 
mix 
One 
bed 
95 190 24 48 16 32 40 80 175 350 44% 
Two 
bed 
132 396 16 48 39 117 16 48 203 609 51% 
Three 
bed 
  16 64 2 8   18 72 5% 
Total 227 586 56 160 57 157 56 128 396 1,031  
169 units 
(42% by unit) 
445 hab rooms 
(43% by hab room) 
 
11 Policy H11 of the Intend to Publish London Plan (and Policy 3.8 of the London 
Plan) recognises the contribution of Build to Rent in addressing housing needs and 
increasing delivery, as well as the distinct economics of this tenure.  The Build to 
Rent units have been secured with a robust covenant, clawback mechanism, and 
management standards, in line with the Mayor’s Affordable Housing and Viability 
SPG and the Intend to Publish London Plan, and the affordable units are secured in 
perpetuity. 
 
12 The affordable housing provision has a tenure split of 33% shared ownership, 
33% London Living Rent and 34% Discount Market rent. The section 106 agreement 
secures the shared ownership units as affordable to a range of incomes below the 