 page 1 
 
 
planning report GLA/5036/01  
3 February 2020 
92-98 Vauxhall Walk, Lambeth 
in the London Borough of Lambeth  
planning application no. 19/02889/FUL 
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral 
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 
and 2007; Town & Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Demolition of existing building and erection of a ground plus 9 storey building (height 
36.7 metres) comprising a flexible A1/A3/B1 unit on the ground floor and 2,709 sq.m. of 
Class B1a office space, with 9th floor communal and private roof terrace and ancillary 
facilities.  
The applicant 
The applicant is Southern House/CLS Holdings PLC and the architect is The Manser 
Practice. 
Strategic issues 
Principle of development: The principle of the redevelopment of this site for mixed use 
office led development in the VNEB Opportunity Area and within the CAZ is strongly 
supported. Further details should be provided as to how flexible and affordable 
workspace would be provided in accordance with the Mayor’s intend to publish London 
Plan. (paragraphs 14 to 17). 
Design and heritage: The approach to the building height, massing and scale is 
supported and the design is of a good quality. The proposed development will not impact 
on protected LVMF views and will not cause harm to heritage assets.(paragraphs 18 to 
26). 
Climate change: Further work is required and evidence submitted in relation to energy, 
flood risk and green infrastructure (paragraphs 29 to 33).  
Transport: The applicant should provide more information regarding: healthy streets, trip 
generation and impact, cycle parking and car parking. A delivery and servicing plan and 
construction logistics plan should be secured by condition (paragraphs 34 to 40).   
Recommendation 
That Lambeth Council be advised that whilst the principle of development is supported 
the application does not fully comply with the London Plan, for the reasons set out in 
paragraph 44 of this report; but that the possible remedies set out in that paragraph of 
this report could address these deficiencies. 
 
 page 2 
Context 
1 On 20 November 2019 the Mayor of London received documents from Lambeth 
Council notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic importance to 
develop the above site for the above uses. Under the provisions of The Town & Country 
Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008, the Mayor must provide the Council with a 
statement setting out whether he considers that the application complies with the 
London Plan, and his reasons for taking that view. The Mayor may also provide other 
comments. This report sets out information for the Mayor’s use in deciding what 
decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under Categories 1C(c) of the Schedule to the Order 
2008: 
 1C(c) “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a building that is more 
than 30 metres high and is outside the City of London.” 
3 Once Lambeth Council has resolved to determine the application, it is required to 
refer it back to the Mayor for his decision as to whether to direct refusal; take it over for 
his own determination; or allow the Council to determine it itself.  
4 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA 
website www.london.gov.uk.  
Site description 
5 The site is located to the north of Vauxhall and to the east of Albert Embankment 
and the main railway line linking Waterloo to south-west London, Surrey and beyond. It 
comprises a rectangular piece of land located on the corner of Vauxhall Walk and 
Tinworth Street, which currently accommodates a three storey 1980s brick building, 
providing 695 sq.m. B1 floorspace divided into five units.  
6 The adjacent buildings to the south and west are part of the Spring Mews 
development, where the latest phase at 16 Tinworth Street was completed last year, 
and comprised student accommodation, CLS head office and the Staybridge Suites 
hotel and the development currently rises to 7 storeys.  
7 The Site is located within the London Plan’s Central Activities Zone (CAZ) and 
the Vauxhall, Nine Elms and Battersea Opportunity Area. It is also located within the 
Albert Embankment Conservation Area. 
8 The site of the proposed development is located on Vauxhall Walk, to the east of 
the A3036 Albert Embankment, which is the nearest section of the Transport for London 
Road Network (TLRN). The site has a Public Transport Access Level (PTAL) of 6a, on a 
scale ranging from 0 to 6b where 6b represents the greatest level of access to public 
transport facilities. The site benefits from access to 8 high frequency bus services within 
a 7 minute walk of the site, along with multiple South Western Rail services and London 
Underground services from Vauxhall. The site is adjacent to a cycle track and within the 
Vauxhall Nine Elms Battersea (VNEB) Opportunity Area (OA). The site will therefore 
benefit from the Northern Line extension which is scheduled to be operational in autumn 
2021. 
 page 3 
 
Details of the proposal 
9 The proposals are for the demolition of existing building and erection of a ground 
plus 9 storey building (height 36.7 metres) comprising a flexible A1/A3/B1 unit on the 
ground floor and 2,709 sq.m. (NIA) of Class B1a office space, with 9th floor communal 
and private roof terrace and ancillary facilities. 
Case history 
10 The application has been subject of GLA pre-application in principle meeting on 
26 February 2019, at which broad support was offered for the principle of the land use 
and the scale of the proposal.  
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
11 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004, the development plan in force for the area is Lambeth Council’s Local Plan (2015) 
(insert year of adoptioand the London Plan 2016 (The Spatial Development Strategy for 
London Consolidated with Alterations since 2011). 
12 The following are also relevant material considerations:  
• The National Planning Policy Framework (updated February 2019); 
• National Planning Practice Guidance; 
• The Mayor’s Intend to Publish London Plan (December 2019);  
• Draft revised Lambeth Local Plan (October 2018); 
• VNEB Opportunity Area Framework (2012). 
 
13 The relevant issues and corresponding policies are as follows:  
• Opportunity Areas London Plan; VNEB Opportunity Area Framework  
• CAZ London Plan; CAZ SPG 
• Heritage/urban design London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character and 
Context SPG;  
• Inclusive design London Plan; Accessible London: achieving an inclusive 
environment SPG; 
• Climate change London Plan; Sustainable Design and Construction SPG; 
London Environment Strategy; 
• Transport and parking London Plan; the Mayor’s Transport Strategy; 
 
Principle of development 
 
14 The application site is located in the VNEB Opportunity Area which London Plan 
Policy 2.3 and Policy SD1 of the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan identifies as 
having the capacity to accommodate 18,500 new jobs and 18,500 new homes.  It is also 
located in the Central Activity Zone (CAZ) where London Plan Policy 2.3 and Policy 
SD4 of the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan promotes the provision of nationally 
and internationally significant office functions including the intensification and provision 
of sufficient space to meet demand for a range of types and sizes of occupier and rental 
 page 4 
values. The Lambeth Local Plan Policy ED3 also supports proposals for offices greater 
than 1,000sqm in areas including the CAZ and the Vauxhall Opportunity Area. 
15 The Central Activity Zone SPG sets out that there should be a sensitive approach 
to application of mixed-use development in the CAZ. This is to ensure that the mix of 
uses support the CAZ strategic functions, incentivise redevelopment and renewal of the 
office stock, maintain an appropriate balance between offices and residential use, 
encourage active ground floor frontages where appropriate and support a mix of uses 
that contributes to the unique character of the CAZ.   
16 The Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan Policy E1 office also states that 
improvements to the quality, flexibility and adaptability of office space of different sizes 
(for micro, small, medium-sized and larger enterprises) should be supported by new 
office provision, refurbishment and mixed-use development, with increases in office 
stock especially supported in the CAZ. The policy also requires that development 
proposals related to new or existing offices should take into account the need for a 
range of suitable workspace including lower cost and affordable workspace. 
17  The development proposals consist of 2,709 sq.m of office floorspace with 59 
sq.m. of flexible A1 / A3 and B1 use on the ground floor, which will replace existing out 
dated office floorspace of 695 sq.m, and increase the quantum of floorspace by 2,014 
sq.m. The proposal also provides flexible commercial uses at ground floor level which 
would serve to activate the ground floor frontage. The application is therefore compliant 
with London Plan and the Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan in relation to CAZ, 
Opportunity Area and office policies.  Notwithstanding this, applicant should set out how 
it has considered the scope to provide a proportion of flexible workspace or smaller 
units suitable for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises and meets the requirement 
of Policy E3 affordable workspace.  
Design and heritage  
 
Design 
 
18 The design principles in Chapter 7 of the London Plan and Chapter 3 of the 
Mayor’s intend to publish London Plan place expectations on all developments to 
achieve a high standard of design which responds to local character, enhances the 
public realm and includes architecture of the highest quality that defines the area and 
makes a positive contribution to the streetscape and cityscape. 
19 The proposed development is for a 10 storey building which will replace an 
existing building of 3 storeys. The Vauxhall and Nine Elms OAPF identifies that 
development within the OA will predominantly be 8 – 10 storeys in height with taller 
buildings in appropriate locations along the Albert Embankment and in the central part 
of Vauxhall. In this case, the proposed building occupies a prominent corner and is an 
infill development located adjacent to the recent Vauxhall Spring Mews development 
which has substantially increased the immediate contextual height. This has resulted in 
the existing building being lower in scale compared to its immediate context with 
exposed gable ends of the adjacent development being prominent on street views. The 
increased building height on this plot would restore presence to the street corner and 
would form a point of interest in the local townscape. The removal of the current 
exposed gable ends on the Spring Mews development would be of benefit to the overall 
appearance of the streetscape. The proposal would not harm the character and 