 page 1 
  
 
 
planning report GLA/5078/01  
3 February 2020 
Canbury Place Car Park (also known as Kingston Gate) 
in the Royal Borough of Kingston upon Thames 
planning application no. 19/02323/FUL 
  
Strategic planning application stage 1 referral  
Town & Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended); Greater London Authority Acts 1999 and 2007; Town & 
Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008. 
The proposal 
Hybrid planning application for the redevelopment of the Canbury Place car park and adjacent land to 
deliver new built-to-rent homes along with retail, leisure, community and employment space, public realm 
improvements and associated access and parking arrangements. 
The applicant 
The applicant is Kingston Gate Properties Ltd and the architect is Jo Cowen Architects. 
Strategic issues summary 
Principle of development: The proposed residential-led mixed use redevelopment of this underutilised 
brownfield site is strongly supported in this opportunity area and town centre location (paragraphs 19-29). 
Affordable housing: 31% affordable housing (by hab room) is proposed at 73% Discount Market Rent 
(DMR) and 27% London Living Rent (LLV). The blended threshold for the site is 42%. This does not qualify 
for the Fast Track Route and does not meet the Mayor’s preferred Built to Rent tenure split. The affordable 
housing offer and the proportion of LLR units should be increased. Further information is required on the 
proposed rent levels for the affordable products across the scheme. GLA officers will robustly interrogate 
the applicant’s detailed viability assessment to ensure that the maximum level of affordable housing is 
delivered. (paragraphs 30-48).  
Urban design and heritage: The broad site layout, height and massing of the buildings are generally 
supported, however development appears bulky on townscape views and the architecture and materiality of 
the blocks should be simplified further. Further public benefits should be demonstrated to outweigh the 
harm caused to the significance of the heritage assets. (paragraphs 49-67). 
Climate change: Further evidence is required to support the savings claimed and ensure compliance with 
policies. As there is limited further potential for carbon dioxide reduction on site, a contribution to the 
borough’s offset fund should be secured. Further information on residential water consumption and urban 
greening is required (paragraphs 68-72). 
Transport: The impact on the highway network is still to be determined. Further information is required to 
confirm that the application complies with the transport policies in the London Plan and the Intend to 
Publish London Plan. A number of specific mitigation measures and further work is required. Contributions 
to facilitate the scheme may be requested (paras 73-88).  
Recommendation 
That the Royal Borough of Kingston Upon Thames be advised that the application does not yet comply with 
the London Plan and the Intend to Publish London Plan for the reasons set out in paragraph 92 of this 
report. However, the resolution of these issues could lead to the application becoming compliant with the 
London Plan and the Intend to Publish London Plan. 

 page 2 
Context 
1 On 14 October 2019, the Mayor of London received documents from the Royal Borough 
of Kingston Upon Thames notifying him of a planning application of potential strategic 
importance to develop the above site for the above uses. Under the provisions of The Town & 
Country Planning (Mayor of London) Order 2008 the Mayor must provide the Royal Borough 
with a statement setting out whether he considers that the application complies with the London 
Plan and the Intend to Publish London Plan, and his reasons for taking that view. The Mayor 
may also provide other comments. This report sets out information for the Mayor’s use in 
deciding what decision to make. 
2 The application is referable under Categories 1A and 1C of the Mayor of London Order 
2008: 
• Category 1A: “Development which comprises or includes the provision of more than 
150 houses, flats, or houses and flats.” 
• Category 1C: “Development which comprises or includes the erection of a building of (c) 
more than 30 metres high and is outside the City of London.” 
3 Once the Royal Borough of Kingston Upon Thames has resolved to determine the 
application, it is required to refer it back to the Mayor for his decision as to whether to direct 
refusal; take it over for his own determination; or allow the Council to determine it itself. 
4 The environmental information for the purposes of the Town and Country Planning 
(Environmental Impact Assessment) Regulations has been taken into account in the 
consideration of this case.  
5 The Mayor of London’s statement on this case will be made available on the GLA 
website www.london.gov.uk. 
Site description 
6 The 0.98 hectare application site is bounded to the north by the recently completed 
Queenshurst residential development, to the north-east by Kingston College, to the east by 
Richmond Road, to the south by Sopwith Way and to the west by Seven Kings Way. The 
application site consists of four parcels of land: Canbury Place car park, which is a Council-run 
surface level car park containing 111 spaces; 12-50 Kingsgate Road which is a vacant site 
formely occupied by Kingsgate Business Centre and which benefits from an existing planning 
permission for a student accommodation block and some employment space; 52 Kingsgate 
Road, which contains two commercial units and two residential flats above and 13-43 Richmond 
Road, which consists of a terrace containing 15 ground floor commercial units with 11 existing 
residential flats on the upper floors. The immediate context to the site contains a number of 
blocks of residential flats. 
7 The application site sits within Kingston town centre and the Intend to Publish London 
Plan identifies Kingston as an Opportunity Area. The site is not in a conservation area and there 
are no listed buildings on the site. However, there are conservation areas and some listed 
buildings in the vicinity of the site. 
 page 3 
8 The closest section of the Transport for London Road Network (TLRN) is the A3 
Kingston Bypass which is over 3.5 kilometres east of the site. The closest section of the 
Strategic Road Network (SRN) is the A308 Wood Street located approximately 100 metres 
south of the site. A number of Mini-Holland cycle schemes are proposed or under construction 
within the town centre. The site is located approximately 200 metres north of Kingston rail 
station. Bus stops are located on Wood Street, Kingsgate Road and the Cromwell Road Bus 
Station providing access to 22 routes. The site has a Public Transport Access Level (PTAL) of 
6a, on a scale of 0 to 6b where 6b is the most accessible. 
Details of the proposal 
9 It is proposed that an application for a residential-led mixed use development be 
submitted in hybrid form. The full details of the proposal are set out below: 
Detailed application: 
10 Demolition of existing buildings and erection of two buildings of up to 25 storeys to 
provide 372 residential apartments (use class C3), 1,738 sq.m. office/retail space (flexible use 
class B1a/A1-A3) and 734 sq.m. nursery/offices (flexible use class D1/B1a) and 696 sq.m. 
gym/offices/retail (flexible uses class D2/B1a/A1-A3) with associated access, parking and 
landscaping arrangements, including the stopping up of Kingsgate Road.  
Outline application with all matters reserved except access 
11 Demolition of existing buildings and erection of a new building of up to 6 storeys to 
provide up to 73 residential apartments (use class C3) and up to 739 sq.m. retail space (use 
classes A1-A3). 
12 The application site will be redeveloped in two phases. Phase 1 will include the majority 
of the proposed residential development as well as the office, retail, nursery, gym floorspace 
(detailed application). Phase 2 will include the redevelopment of the existing shopping parade at 
13-43 Richmond Road (outline application). 
Case history 
13 As noted above the land at 12-50 Kingsgate Road formally occupied by Kingsgate 
Business Centre and immediately to the south of the Queenshurst development benefits from 
an existing planning permission (LPA ref. 13/12690) granted on appeal in November 2014 for a 
student residential development (228 bed spaces) with 500 sq.m. of employment space and no 
affordable housing. Reserved matters (15/12961/REM) were approved in July 2017. Works to 
implement this planning permission were undertaken in July 2019. 
14 The planning history for the sites along Richmond Road include various small-scale 
residential and commercial planning applications. 
15 A pre-application meeting was held on 20 October 2017 with GLA officers. Officers were 
generally supportive of the scheme. No pre-application advice was issued pending some design 
amendments. 
Strategic planning issues and relevant policies and guidance 
16 For the purposes of Section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, 
the development plan in force for the area is the Royal Borough’s Core Strategy Development 
Plan Document (2012); Kingston Town Centre Area Action Plan (K+20) (2008); and the London 
Plan 2016 (Consolidated with Alterations since 2011).  
17 The following are relevant material considerations: 
 page 4 
• The National Planning Policy Framework and National Planning Practice Guidance; 
• Intend to Publish London Plan (December 2019); 
• The Mayor’s Affordable Housing and Viability SPG (August 2017). This must be read 
subject to the decision in R (McCarthy & Stone) v. the Mayor of London; 
• Kingston Direction of Travel (Oct 2016); 
• New Local Plan Early Engagement Document (Regulation 18, May 2019); 
• North Kingston Development Brief (Oct 2016); 
• Affordable Housing SPD (May 2013). 
 
 
18 The relevant strategic issues and corresponding policies are as follows: 
• Mix of uses London Plan; 
• Social infrastructure London Plan; 
• Housing London Plan; Housing SPG; Housing Strategy; Shaping 
Neighbourhoods: Play and Informal Recreation SPG; Shaping 
Neighbourhoods: Character and Context SPG;  
• Affordable housing London Plan; Housing SPG; Housing Strategy; Mayor’s 
Affordable Housing and Viability SPG; 
• Urban design & heritage London Plan; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Character and 
Context SPG; Housing SPG; Shaping Neighbourhoods: Play 
and Informal Recreation SPG; 
• Inclusive design London Plan; Accessible London: Achieving an Inclusive 
Environment SPG; 
• Sustainable development London Plan; Sustainable Design and Construction SPG; 
Mayor’s Climate Change Adaptation Strategy; Mayor’s 
Environment Strategy;  
• Transport London Plan; Mayor’s Transport Strategy. 
Principle of development  
19 The application site falls within the Kingston Opportunity Area and is in Kingston 
Metropolitan Town Centre as identified in the London Plan and the Intend to Publish London 
Plan. The Intend to Publish London Plan identifies the opportunity area as being capable of 
providing an indicative 9,000 new homes and 5,000 new jobs, and Kingston Town Centre is 
identified in the 2016 Direction of Travel for the Royal Borough of Kingston Upon Thames 
document as an area with scope for significant change. The site is also identified in Kingston 
Town Centre Area Action Plan as a proposal site/potential redevelopment site. The North 
Kingston Development Brief provides a framework for the Council’s vision to “transform this 
previously largely derelict part of Kingston Town Centre into a new residential and learning 
mixed use quarter” with office, commercial, student accommodation and retail (including A2/A3) 
and/or community, commercial, residential, car parking and education uses.  
20 The Intend to Publish London Plan Policy GG2 seeks to create successful, sustainable 
mixed use places that make the best use of land and encourage those involved in planning and 
development to proactively explore the potential to intensify the use of land to support additional 
homes and workspaces, promoting higher density development, particularly in locations that are 
well-connected to jobs, services, infrastructure and amenities by public transport walking and 
cycling. London Plan Policy 3.3 and the Intend to Publish London Plan Policy H1 seek to 
increase the supply of housing in the capital. 
 
 
 